SRI  AUROBINDO 


mns  To  The  Mystic  Fire 


(Hymns  to  Agni  from  the  Rig  Veda 
translated  in  their  esoteric  sense j 


VL> 

If  15 


SRI  AUROBINDO  ASHRAM 
PONDICHERRY 


Publishers: 

Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram 
Pondicherry 


First  Edition  ..  ..  1946 

Second  Edition  (Enlarged)  ..  1952 


All  Rights  Reserved 


of  Southern  Caftfornte  LffefOVSf 


Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Press 
Pondicherry 

PRINTED  IN  INDIA 


$61/8/51/3000 


Mecnodioc  vvoi»u  oervice  Fund 


PUBLISHERS5  NOTE 


This  enlarged  edition  includes,  in  addition  to  the 
-g  contents  of  the  first  edition,  the  following : 

(1)  The  Hymns  of  the  Atris  which  originally  appea¬ 
ls  red  in  the  “Arya”  (Vol.  II,  1915-16).  Considerable 
^2  portions  of  this  series  have  been  subsequently 

revised. 

(2)  Translations  that  have  hitherto  remained 
unpublished.  Among  these  are  a  few  which  were 
found  in  the  author’s  earlier  manuscripts ;  they  have 
been  included,  as  they  stand,  in  order  to  make  this 
collection  as  complete  as  possible. 

Barring  a  few  hymns  of  the  first  Mandala,  almost 
all  the  hymns  to  Agni  in  the  Rig  Veda,  translated 
by  Sri  Aurobindo,  are  presented  here  in  a  single 
volume. 


CONTENTS 


I 


Pages 

Foreword  •••  1 

The  Doctrine  of  the  Mystics  xxviii 

Mandala  One  1-55 

HYMNS  OF  MADHUCHCHANDAS  ...  3 

MEDHATITHI  KANWA  ...  5 

KANWA  GHAURA  ...  9 

PARASARA  SHAKTYA  ...  17 

DAIVODASI  PARUCCHEPA  ...  43 

DIRGHATAMAS  AUGHATHYA  ...  49 

Mandala  Two  57-93 

HYMNS  OF  GRITSAMADA  BHARGAVA  ...  59 

Mandala  Three  95-183 

HYMNS  OF  GATHINA  VISHWAMITRA  ...  97 

Mandala  Four  185-245 

HYMNS  OF  VAMADEVA  GAUTAMA  ...  187 


I 


CONTENTS 


Pages 


Mandala  Five 

247-315 

HYMNS  OF  ATRIS 

...  249 

Mandala  Six 

317-377 

HYMNS  OF  BHARADWAJA  BARHASPATYA 

...  319 

Mandala  Seven 

379-427 

HYMNS  OF  VASISHTHA  MAITRAVARUNI 

...  381 

Mandala  Eight 

429-511 

HYMNS  OF  VATSA  KANWA 

...  431 

SOBHARI  KANWA 

i..  433 

VISHWAMANA  VAIYASHWA 

...  443 

SHYAVASHWA  ATREYA 

...  451 

NABHAKA  KANWA 

...  453 

VIRUPA  ANGIRASA 

...  463 

BHARGA  PRAGATHA 

...  477' 

PURUMILHA  AND  OTHERS 

...  483 

HARYATA  PRAGATHA 

...  487 

GOPAVANA  ATREYA 

...  491 

VIRUPA  ANGIRASA 

...  497 

USHANA  KAVYA 

...  501 

PRAYOGA  BHARGA VA 

...  503 

SOBHARI  KANWA 

.  . 

...  507 

ii 


CONTENTS 


Pages 


M AND ALA  Ten 

513- 

-607 

HYMNS  OF  TRITA  APTYA 

•  •• 

515 

TRISHARA  TWASHTRA 

•  •  • 

533 

VIMODA  AINDRA  OR  PRAJAPATYA, 

OR  VASUKRIT 

•  •• 

543 

VATSPARI  BHALANDANA 

•  •  • 

549 

SUMITRA  SON  OF  VADHRYASHWA 

561 

AGNI  SAUCHIKA  OR  V AISHWANARA, 

OR  SAPTI  VAJAMBHARA 

•  •• 

569 

PAYU  BHARADWAJA 

... 

575 

ARUNA  V  AIT  AH  AV  Y  A 

583 

JAMADAGNI  BHARGAVA 

... 

589 

UPASTUTA  VARSHTIHAVYA 

... 

593 

GHITRAMAHA  VASISHTHA 

•  •  • 

595 

AGNI  PAVAKA 

•  •• 

599 

MRILIKA  VASISHTHA 

ft  ft  ft 

601 

KETU  AGNEYA 

... 

603 

AGNEYA  VATSA 

... 

605 

SAMVANANA  ANGIRASA 

... 

607 

hi 


I 


t 


i 


FOREWORD 


In  ancient  times  the  Veda  was  revered  as  a  sacred 
book  of  wisdom,  a  great  mass  of  inspired  poetry,  the 
work  of  Rishis,  seers  and  sages,  who  received  in  their  illu¬ 
mined  minds  rather  than  mentally  constructed  a  great 
universal,  eternal  and  impersonal  Truth  which  they 
embodied  in  Mantras,  revealed  verses  of  power,  not  of  an 
ordinary  but  of  a  divine  inspiration  and  source.  The 
name  given  to  these  sages  was  Kavi,  which  afterwards 
came  to  mean  any  poet,  but  at  the  time  had  the  sense  of 
a  seer  of  truth, — the  Veda  itself  describes  them  as  kavayah 
satyairutah ,  “seers  who  are  hearers  of  the  Truth55  and  the 
Veda  itself  was  called,  s'ruti,  a  word  which  came  to  mean 
“revealed  Scripture55.  The  seers  of  the  Upanishad  had 
the  same  idea  about  the  Veda  and  frequently  appealed 
to  its  authority  for  the  truths  they  themselves  announced 
and  these  too  afterwards  came  to  be  regarded  as  Sruti, 
revealed  Scripture,  and  were  included  in  the  sacred 
Canon. 

This  tradition  persevered  in  the  Brahmanas  and  con¬ 
tinued  to  maintain  itself  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the 
ritualistic  commentators,  Yajnikas,  to  explain  everything 
as  myth  and  rite  and  the  division  made  by  the  Pandits 
distinguishing  the  section  of  works,  Karmakanda,  and 
the  section  of  Knowledge,  Jnanakanda,  identifying  the 
former  with  the  hymns  and  the  latter  with  the  Upanishads. 
This  drowning  of  the  parts  of  Knowledge  by  the  parts  of 
ceremonial  works  was  strongly  criticised  in  one  of  the 


al 


x 


FOREWORD 


Upanishads  and  in  the  Gita,  but  both  look  on  the  Veda 
as  a  Book  of  Knowledge.  Even,  the  Sruti  including  both 
Veda  and  Upanishad  was  regarded  as  the  supreme  autho¬ 
rity  for  spiritual  knowledge  and  infallible. 

Is  this  all  legend  and  moonshine,  or  a  groundless  and 
even  nonsensical  tradition?  Or  is  it  the  fact  that  there  is 
only  a  scanty  element  of  higher  ideas  in  some  later  hymns 
which  started  this  theory?  Did  the  writers  of  the  Upa¬ 
nishads  foist  upon  the  Riks  a  meaning  which  was  not 
there  but  read  into  it  by  their  imagination  or  a  fanciful 
interpretation?  Modern  European  scholarship  insists  on 
having  it  so.  And  it  has  persuaded  the  mind  of  modern 
India.  In  favour  of  this  view  is  the  fact  that  the  Rishis 
of  the  Veda  were  not  only  seers  but  singers  and  priests  of 
sacrifice,  that  their  chants  were  written  to  be  sung  at 
public  sacrifices  and  refer  constantly  to  the  customary 
ritual  and  seem  to  call  for  the  outward  objects  of  these 
ceremonies,  wealth,  prosperity,  victory  over  enemies. 
Sayana,  the  great  commentator,  gives  us  a  ritualistic 
and  where  necessary  a  tentatively  mythical  or  historical 
sense  to  the  Riks,  very  rarely  does  he  put  forward  any 
higher  meaning  though  sometimes  he  lets  a  higher  sense 
come  through  or  puts  it  as  an  alternative  as  if  in  despair 
of  finding  out  some  ritualistic  or  mythical  interpretation. 
But  still  he  does  not  reject  the  spiritual  authority  of  the 
Veda  or  deny  that  there  is  a  higher  truth  contained  in 
the  Riks.  This  last  development  was  left  to  our  own 
times  and  popularised  by  occidental  scholars. 

The  European  scholars  took  up  the  ritualistic  tradition, 
but  for  the  rest  they  dropped  Sayana  overboard  and 
went  on  to  make  their  own  etymological  explanation  of 
the  words,  or  build  up  their  own  conjectural  meanings 
of  the  Vedic  verses  and  gave  a  new  presentation  often 


ii 


FOREWORD 


arbitrary  and  imaginative.  What  they  sought  for  in  the 
Veda  was  the  early  history  of  India,  its  society,  institu¬ 
tions,  customs,  a  civilisation-picture  of  the  times.  They 
invented  the  theory  based  on  the  difference  of  languages 
of  an  Aryan  invasion  from  the  north,  an  invasion  of  a 
Dravidian  India  of  which  the  Indians  themselves  had  no 
memory  or  tradition  and  of  which  there  is  no  record  in 
their  epic  or  classical  literature.  The  Vedic  religion  was 
in  this  account  only  a  worship  of  Nature-Gods  full  of 
solar  myths  and  consecrated  by  sacrifices  and  a  sacrificial 
liturgy  primitive  enough  in  its  ideas  and  contents,  and 
it  is  these  barbaric  prayers  that  arc  the  much  vaunted, 
haloed  and  apotheosized  Veda. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  beginning  there  was 
a  worship  of  the  Powers  of  the  physical  world,  the  Sun, 
Moon,  Heaven  and  Earth,  Wind,  Rain  and  Storm  etc., 
the  Sacred  Rivers  and  a  number  of  Gods  who  presided 
over  the  workings  of  Nature.  That  was  the  general 
aspect  of  the  ancient  worship  in  Greece,  Rome,  India 
and  among  other  ancient  peoples.  But  in  all  these 
countries  these  gods  began  to  assume  a  higher,  a  psycho¬ 
logical  function ;  Pallas  Athene  who  may  have  been 
originally  a  Dawn-Goddess  springing  in  flames  from  the 
head  of  Zeus,  the  Sky-God,  Dyaus  of  the  Veda,  has  in 
classical  Greece  a  higher  function  and  was  identified  by 
the  Romans  with  their  Minerva,  the  Goddess  of  learning 
and  wisdom;  similarly,  Saraswati,  a  River  Goddess, 
becomes  in  India  the  goddess  of  wisdom,  learning  and 
the  arts  and  crafts:  all  the  Greek  deities  have  undergone 
a  change  in  this  direction — Apollo,  the  Sun-God,  has 
become  a  god  of  poetry  and  prophecy,  Hephaestus  the 
Fire-God  a  divine  smith,  god  of  labour.  In  India  the 
process  was  arrested  half-way,  and  the  Vedic  Gods 


FOREWORD 


developed  their  psychological  functions  but  retained 
more  fixedly  their  external  character  and  for  higher 
purposes  gave  place  to  a  new  pantheon.  They  had  to 
give  precedence  to  Puranic  deities  who  developed  out 
of  the  early  company  but  assumed  larger  cosmic  func¬ 
tions,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  Brahma — developing  from  the 
Vcdic  Brihaspati,  or  Brahmanaspati, — Shiva,  Lakshmi, 
Durga.  Thus  in  India  the  change  in  the  gods  was  less 
complete,  the  earlier  deities  became  the  inferior  divinities 
of  the  Puranic  pantheon  and  this  was  largely  due  to  the 
survival  of  the  Rig  Veda  in  which  their  psychological 
and  their  external  functions  co-existed  and  are  both 
given  a  powerful  emphasis;  there  was  no  such  early 
literary  record  to  maintain  the  original  features  of  the 
Gods  of  Greece  and  Rome. 

This  change  was  evidently  due  to  a  cultural  develop¬ 
ment  in  these  early  peoples  who  became  progressively 
more  mentalised  and  less  engrossed  in  the  physical  life 
as  they  advanced  in  civilisation  and  needed  to  read 
into  their  religion  and  their  deities  finer  and  subtler 
aspects  which  would  support  their  more  highly  menta¬ 
lised  concepts  and  interests  and  find  for  them  a  true 
spiritual  being  or  some  celestial  figure  as  their  support 
and  sanction.  But  the  largest  part  in  determining  and 
deepening  this  inward  turn  must  be  attributed  to  the 
Mystics  who  had  an  enormous  influence  on  these  early 
civilisations;  there  was  indeed  almost  everywhere  an  age 
of  the  Mysteries  in  which  men  of  a  deeper  knowledge 
and  self-knowledge  established  their  practices,  significant 
rites,  symbols,  secret  lore  within  or  on  the  border  of  the 
more  primitive  exterior  religions.  This  took  different 
forms  in  different  countries;  in  Greece  there  were  the 
Orphic  and  Eleusinian  Mysteries,  in  Egypt  and  Chaldea 


IV 


FOREWORD 


the  priests  and  their  occult  lore  and  magic,  in  Persia  the 
Magi,  in  India  the  Rishis.  The  preoccupation  of  the 
Mystics  was  with  self-knowledge  and  a  profounder 
world-knowledge;  they  found  out  that  in  man  there  was 
a  deeper  self  and  inner  being  behind  the  surface  of  the 
outward  physical  man,  which  it  was  his  highest  business 
to  discover  and  know.  "Rnow  thyself”  was  their  great 
precept,  just  as  in  India  to  know  the  Self,  the  Atman 
became  the  great  spiritual  need,  the  highest  thing  for 
the  human  being.  They  found  also  a  Truth,  a  Reality 
behind  the  outward  aspects  of  the  universe  and  to  dis¬ 
cover,  follow,  realise  this  Truth  was  their  great  aspiration. 
They  discovered  secrets  and  powers  of  Nature  which 
were  not  those  of  the  physical  world  but  which  could 
bring  occult  mastery  over  the  physical  world  and  physical 
things  and  to  systematise  this  occult  knowledge  and 
power  was  also  one  of  their  strong  preoccupations.  But 
all  this  could  only  be  safely  done  by  a  difficult  and  careful 
training,  discipline,  purification  of  the  nature;  it  could 
not  be  done  by  the  ordinary  man.  If  men  entered  into 
these  things  without  a  severe  test  and  training  it  would 
be  dangerous  to  themselves  and  others;  this  knowledge, 
these  powers  could  be  misused,  misinterpreted,  turned 
from  truth  to  falsehood,  from  good  to  evil.  A  strict 
secrecy  was  therefore  maintained,  the  knowledge  handed 
down  behind  a  veil  from  master  to  disciple.  A  veil  of 
symbols  was  created  behind  which  these  mysteries  could 
shelter,  formulas  of  speech  also  which  could  be  under¬ 
stood  by  the  initiated  but  were  either  not  known  by 
others  or  were  taken  by  them  in  an  outward  sense  which 
carefully  covered  their  true  meaning  and  secret.  This 
was  the  substance  of  Mysticism  everywhere. 

It  has  been  the  tradition  in  India  from  the  earliest 


v 


FOREWORD 


times  that  the  Rishis,  the  poet-seers  of  the  Veda,  were 
men  of  this  type,  men  with  a  great  spiritual  and  occult 
knowledge  not  shared  by  ordinary  human  beings,  men 
who  handed  down  this  knowledge  and  their  powers  by 
a  secret  initiation  to  their  descendant  and  chosen  disciples. 
It  is  a  gratuitous  assumption  to  suppose  that  this  tradition 
was  wholly  unfounded,  a  superstition  that  arose  suddenly 
or  slowly  formed  in  a  void,  with  nothing  whatever  to 
support  it;  some  foundation  there  must  have  been  how¬ 
ever  small  or  however  swelled  by  legend  and  the  accre¬ 
tions  of  centuries.  But  if  it  is  true,  then  inevitably  the 
poet-seers  must  have  expressed  something  of  their  secret 
knowledge,  their  mystic  lore  in  their  writings  and  such 
an  element  must  be  present,  however  well-concealed  by 
an  occult  language  or  behind  a  technique  of  symbols, 
and  if  it  is  there  it  must  be  to  some  extent  discoverable. 
It  is  true  that  an  antique  language,  obsolete  words, — 
Yaska  counts  more  than  four  hundred  of  which  he  did  not 
know  the  meaning, — and  often  a  difficult  and  out-of-date 
diction  helped  to  obscure  their  meaning;  the  loss  of  the 
sense  of  their  symbols,  the  glossary  of  which  they  kept 
to  themselves,  made  them  unintelligible  to  later  genera¬ 
tions;  even  in  the  time  of  the  Upanishads  the  spiritual 
seekers  of  the  age  had  to  resort  to  initiation  and  medi¬ 
tation  to  penetrate  into  their  secret  knowledge,  while  the 
scholars  afterwards  were  at  sea  and  had  to  resort  to 
conjecture  and  to  concentrate  on  a  mental  interpretation 
or  to  explain  by  myths,  by  the  legends  of  the  Brahmanas 
themselves  often  symbolic  and  obscure.  But  still  to  make 
this  discovery  will  be  the  sole  way  of  getting  at  the  true 
sense  and  the  true  value  of  the  Veda.  We  must  take 
seriously  the  hint  of  Yaska,  accept  the  Rishi’s  description 
of  the  Veda’s  contents  as  “seer-wisdoms,  seer-words,” 


vi 


FOREWORD 


and  look  for  whatever  clue  we  can  find  to  this  ancient 
wisdom.  Otherwise  the  Veda  must  remain  for  ever  a 
sealed  book;  grammarians,  etymologists,  scholastic 
conjectures  will  not  open  to  us  the  sealed  chamber. 

For  it  is  a  fact  that  the  tradition  of  a  secret  meaning 
and  a  mystic  wisdom  couched  in  the  Riks  of  the  ancient 
Veda  was  as  old  as  the  Veda  itself.  The  Vedic  Rishis 
believed  that  their  Mantras  were  inspired  from  higher 
hidden  planes  of  consciousness  and  contained  this  secret 
knowledge.  The  words  of  the  Veda  could  only  be  known 
in  their  true  meaning  by  one  who  was  himself  a  seer  or 
mystic;  from  others  the  verses  withheld  their  hidden 
knowledge.  In  one  of  Vamadeva’s  hymns  in  the  fourth 
Mandala  (IV.  3.  16)  the  Rishi  describes  himself  as  one 
illumined  expressing  through  his  thought  and  speech 
words  of  guidance,  “secret  words55 — “ninya  vacdmsi 55 — 
“seer- wisdoms  that  utter  their  inner  meaning  to  the  seer55 
— kavyani  kavaye  nivacana.  The  Rishi  Dirghatamas  speaks 
of  the  Riks,  the  Mantras  of  the  Veda,  as  existing  “in  a 
supreme  ether,  imperishable  and  immutable  in  which  all 
the  gods  are  seated,55  and  he  adds  “one  who  knows  not 
That  what  shall  he  do  with  the  Rik?55  (I.  164.  39) 
He  further  alludes  to  four  planes  from  which  the  speech 
issues,  three  of  them  hidden  in  the  secrecy  while  the  fourth 
is  human,  and  from  there  comes  the  ordinary  word;  but 
the  word  and  thought  of  the  Veda  belongs  to  the  higher 
planes  (I.  164.  46).  Elsewhere  in  the  Riks  the  Vedic 
Word  is  described  (X.  71)  as  that  which  is  supreme  and 
the  topmost  height  of  speech,  the  best  and  the  most  fault¬ 
less.  It  is  something  that  is  hidden  in  secrecy  and  from 
there  comes  out  and  is  manifested.  It  has  entered  into 
the  truth-seers,  the  Rishis,  and  it  is  found  by  following 
the  track  of  their  speech.  But  all  cannot  enter  into  its 


vn 


foreword 


secret  meaning.  Those  who  do  not  know  the  inner  sense 
are  as  men  who  seeing  see  not,  hearing  hear  not,  only  to 
one  here  and  there  the  Word  desiring  him  like  a  beauti¬ 
fully  robed  wife  to  a  husband  lays  open  her  body. 
Others  unable  to  drink  steadily  of  the  milk  of  the  Word, 
the  Vedic  cow,  move  with  it  as  with  one  that  gives  no 
milk,  to  him  the  Word  is  a  tree  without  flowers  or  fruits. 
This  is  quite  clear  and  precise;  it  results  from  it  beyond 
doubt  that  even  then  while  the  Rig  Veda  was  being  written 
the  Riks  were  regarded  as  having  a  secret  sense  which 
was  not  open  to  all.  There  was  an  occult  and  spiritual 
knowledge  in  the  sacred  hymns  and  by  this  knowledge 
alone,  it  is  said,  one  can  know  the  truth  and  rise  to  a 
higher  existence.  This  belief  was  not  a  later  tradition 
but  held,  probably,  by  all  and  evidently  by  some  of  the 
greatest  Rishis  such  as  Dirghatamas  and  Vamadeva. 

The  tradition,  then,  was  there  and  it  was  prolonged 
after  the  Vedic  times.  Yaska  speaks  of  several  schools  of 
interpretation  of  the  Veda.  There  was  a  sacrificial  or  ritu¬ 
alistic  interpretation,  the  historical  or  rather  mythological 
explanation,  an  explanation  by  the  grammarians  and 
etymologists,  by  the  logicians,  a  spiritual  interpretation. 
Yaska  himself  declares  that  there  is  a  triple  knowledge 
and  therefore  a  triple  meaning  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  a 
sacrificial  or  ritualistic  knowledge,  a  knowledge  of  the 
gods  and  finally  a  spiritual  knowledge;  but  the  last  is  the 
true  sense  and  when  one  gets  it  the  others  drop  or  are 
cut  away.  It  is  this  spiritual  sense  that  saves  and  the 
rest  is  outward  and  subordinate.  He  says  further  that 
“the  Rishis  saw  the  truth,  the  true  law  of  things,  directly 
by  an  inner  vision;”  afterwards  the  knowledge  and  the 
inner  sense  of  the  Veda  were  almost  lost  and  the  Rishis 
who  still  knew  had  to  save  it  by  handing  it  down  through 


vni 


« 


FOREWORD 

initiation  to  disciples  and  at  a  last  stage  outward  and 
mental  means  had  to  be  used  for  finding  the  sense  such 
as  Nirukta  and  other  Vedangas.  But  even  then,  he  says, 
“the  true  sense  of  the  Veda  can  be  recovered  directly  by 
meditation  and  tapasya,55  those  who  can  use  these  means 
need  no  outward  aids  for  this  knowledge.  This  also 
is  sufficiently  clear  and  positive. 

The  tradition  of  a  mystic  element  in  the  Veda  as  a 
source  of  Indian  civilisation,  its  religion,  its  philosophy, 
its  culture  is  more  in  consonance  with  historical  fact  than 
the  European  scouting  of  this  idea.  The  nineteenth 
century  European  scholarship  writing  in  a  period  of 
materialistic  rationalism  regarded  the  history  of  the  race 
as  a  development  out  of  primitive  barbarism  or  semi¬ 
barbarism,  a  crude  social  life  and  religion  and  a  mass  of 
superstitions,  by  the  growth  of  outward  civilised  insti¬ 
tutions,  manners  and  habits  through  the  development 
of  intellect  and  reason,  art,  philosophy  and  science  and  a 
clearer  and  sounder,  more  matter-of-fact  intelligence.  The 
ancient  idea  about  the  Veda  could  not  fit  into  this  picture; 
it  was  regarded  as  rather  a  part  of  ancient  superstitious 
ideas  and  a  primitive  error.  But  we  can  now  form  a  more 
accurate  idea  of  the  development  of  the  race.  The  ancient 
more  primitive  civilisations  held  in  themselves  the  elements 
of  the  later  growth  but  their  early  wise  men  were  not 
scientists  and  philosophers  or  men  of  high  intellectual 
reason  but  mystics  and  even  mystery-men,  occultists, 
religious  seekers;  they  were  seekers  after  a  veiled  truth 
behind  things  and  not  of  an  outward  knowledge.  The 
scientists  and  philosophers  came  afterwards;  they  were 
preceded  by  the  mystics  and  often  like  Pythagoras  and 
Plato  were  to  some  extent  mystics  themselves  or  drew 
many  of  their  ideas  from  the  mystics.  In  India  philosophy 


IX 


FOREWORD 


grew  out  of  the  seeking  of  the  mystics  and  retained  and 
developed  their  spiritual  aims  and  kept  something  of 
their  methods  in  later  Indian  spiritual  discipline  and 
Yoga.  The  Vedic  tradition,  the  fact  of  a  mystical  element 
in  the  Veda  fits  in  perfectly  with  this  historical  truth  and 
takes  its  place  in  the  history  of  Indian  culture.  The 
tradition  of  the  Veda  as  the  bed-rock  of  Indian  civilisa¬ 
tion — not  merely  a  barbaric  sacrificial  liturgy — is  more 
than  a  tradition,  it  is  an  actual  fact  of  history. 

But  even  if  an  element  of  high  spiritual  knowledge,  or 
passages  full  of  high  ideas  were  found  in  the  hymns,  it 
might  be  supposed  that  those  are  perhaps  only  a  small 
factor,  while  the  rest  is  a  sacrificial  liturgy,  formulas  of 
prayer  and  praise  to  the  Gods  meant  to  induce  them 
to  shower  on  the  sacrificers  material  blessings  such  as 
plenty  of  cows,  horses,  fighting  men,  sons,  food,  wealth 
of  all  kinds,  protection,  victory  in  battle,  or  to  bring  down 
rain  from  heaven,  recover  the  sun  from  clouds  or  from 
the  grip  of  Night,  the  free  flowing  of  the  seven  rivers, 
recovery  of  cattle  from  the  Dasyus  (or  the  Dravidians) 
and  the  other  boons  which  on  the  surface  seem  to  be 
the  object  of  this  ritual  worship.  The  Rishis  would  then 
be  men  with  some  spiritual  or  mystic  knowledge  but 
otherwise  dominated  by  all  the  popular  ideas  proper  to 
their  times.  These  two  elements  they  would  then  mix  up 
intimately  in  their  hymns  and  this  would  account  at  least 
in  part  for  the  obscurity  and  the  rather  strange  and  some¬ 
times  grotesque  jumble  which  the  traditional  interpreta¬ 
tion  offers  us.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  a  considerable 
body  of  high  thinking  clearly  appears,  if  there  is  a  large 
mass  of  verses  or  whole  hymns  which  admit  only  of  a 
mystic  character  and  significance,  and  if  finally,  the 
ritualistic  and  external  details  are  found  to  take  frequently 


x 


FOREWORD 


the  appearance  of  symbols  such  as  were  always  used  by  the 
mystics,  and  if  there  are  many  clear  indications,  even  some 
explicit  statements  in  the  hymns  themselves  of  such  a 
meaning,  then  all  changes.  We  are  in  the  presence  of 
a  great  scripture  of  the  mystics  with  a  double  significance, 
one  exoteric  the  other  esoteric,  the  symbols  themselves 
have  a  meaning  which  makes  them  a  part  of  the  esoteric 
significance,  an  element  in  the  secret  teaching  and  know¬ 
ledge.  The  whole  of  the  Rig  Veda,  a  small  number  of 
hymns  perhaps  excepted,  becomes  in  its  inner  sense  such  a 
Scripture.  At  the  same  time  the  exoteric  sense  need  not 
be  merely  a  mask;  the  Riks  may  have  been  regarded  by 
their  authors  as  words  of  power,  powerful  not  only  for 
internal  but  for  external  things.  A  purely  spiritual  scrip¬ 
ture  would  concern  itself  with  only  spiritual  significances, 
but  the  ancient  mystics  were  also  what  we  would  call 
occultists,  men  who  believed  that  by  inner  means 
outer  as  well  as  inner  results  could  be  produced,  that 
thought  and  words  could  be  so  used  as  to  bring  about 
realisations  of  every  kind, — in  the  phrase  common  in 
the  Veda  itself, — both  the  human  and  the  divine. 

But  where  is  this  body  of  esoteric  meaning  in  the 
Veda?  It  is  only  discoverable  if  we  give  a  constant  and 
straight-forward  meaning  to  the  words  and  formulas 
employed  by  the  Rishis,  especially  to  the  key-words  which 
bear  as  keystones  the  whole  structure  of  their  doctrine. 
One  such  word  is  the  great  word,  Ritam,  Truth;  Truth 
was  the  central  object  of  the  seeking  of  the  mystics,  a 
spiritual  or  inner  Truth,  a  truth  of  ourselves,  a  truth  of 
things,  a  truth  of  the  world  and  of  the  gods,  a  truth 
behind  all  we  are  and  all  that  things  are.  In  the  ritualistic 
interpretation  this  master  word  of  the  Vedic  knowledge 
has  been  interpreted  in  all  kinds  of  senses  according  to 


xi 


FOREWORD 


the  convenience  or  fancy  of  the  interpreter,  “truth”, 
“sacrifice”,  “water”,  “one  who  has  gone”,  even  “food”, 
not  to  speak  of  a  number  of  other  meanings;  if  we  do  that, 
there  can  be  no  certitude  in  our  dealings  with  the  Veda. 
But  let  us  consistently  give  it  the  same  master  sense  and 
a  strange  but  clear  result  emerges.  If  we  apply  the  same 
treatment  to  other  standing  terms  of  the  Veda,  if  we  give 
them  their  ordinary,  natural  and  straightforward  mean¬ 
ing  and  give  it  constantly  and  consistently  not  monkeying 
about  with  their  sense  or  turning  them  into  purely 
ritualistic  expressions,  if  we  allow  to  certain  important 
words,  such  as  sravas ,  kratu ,  the  psychological  meaning 
of  which  they  are  capable  and  which  they  undoubtedly 
bear  in  certain  passages  as  when  the  Veda  describes 
Agni  as  kratur  hrdi ,  then  this  result  becomes  all  the  more 
clear,  extended,  pervasive.  If,  in  addition,  we  follow  the 
indications  which  abound,  sometimes  the  explicit  state¬ 
ment  of  the  Rishis  about  the  inner  sense  of  their  sym¬ 
bols,  interpret  in  the  same  sense  the  significant  legends 
and  figures  on  which  they  constantly  return,  the  con¬ 
quest  over  Vritra  and  the  battle  with  the  Vritras,  his 
powers,  the  recovery  of  the  Sun,  the  Waters,  the  Cows 
from  the  Panis  or  other  Dasyus,  the  whole  Rig  Veda 
reveals  itself  as  a  body  of  doctrine  and  practice,  esoteric, 
occult,  spiritual,  such  as  might  have  been  given  by  the 
mystics  in  any  ancient  country  but  which  actually  survives 
for  us  only  in  the  Veda.  It  is  there  deliberately  hidden 
by  a  veil,  but  the  veil  is  not  so  thick  as  we  first  imagine; 
we  have  only  to  use  our  eyes  and  the  veil  vanishes;  the 
body  of  the  Word,  the  Truth  stands  out  before  us. 

Many  of  the  lines,  many  whole  hymns  even  of  the 
Veda  bear  on  their  face  a  mystic  meaning;  they  are  evi¬ 
dently  an  occult  form  of  speech,  have  an  inner  meaning. 


Xll 


FOREWORD 


When  the  seer  speaks  of  Agni  as  “the  luminous  guardian 
of  the  Truth  shining  out  in  his  own  home,”  or  of  Mitra 
and  Varuna  or  other  gods  as  “in  touch  with  the  Truth 
and  making  the  Truth  grow55  or  as  “born  in  the  Truth,” 
these  are  words  of  a  mystic  poet,  who  is  thinking  of  that 
inner  Truth  behind  things  of  which  the  early  sages  were 
the  seekers.  He  is  not  thinking  of  the  Nature-Power  pre¬ 
siding  over  the  outer  element  of  fire  or  of  the  fire  of  the 
ceremonial  sacrifice.  Or  he  speaks  of  Saraswati  as  one 
who  impels  the  words  of  Truth  and  awakes  to  right 
thinkings  or  as  one  opulent  with  the  thought:  Saraswati 
awakes  to  consciousness  or  makes  us  conscious  of  the 
“Great  Ocean  and  illumines  all  our  thoughts.”  It  is 
surely  not  the  River  Goddess  whom  he  is  thus  hymning 
but  the  Power,  the  River  if  you  will,  of  inspiration,  the 
word  of  the  Truth,  bringing  its  light  into  our  thoughts, 
building  up  in  us  that  Truth,  an  inner  knowledge.  The 
Gods  constantly  stand  out  in  their  psychological  func¬ 
tions;  the  sacrifice  is  the  outer  symbol  of  an  inner  work, 
an  inner  interchange  between  the  gods  and  men, — man 
giving  what  he  has,  the  gods  giving  in  return  the  horses 
of  power,  the  herds  of  light,  the  heroes  of  Strength  to  be 
his  retinue,  winning  for  him  victory  in  his  battle  with  the. 
hosts  of  Darkness,  Vritras,  Dasyus,  Panis.  When  the 
Rishi  says,  “Let  us  become  conscious  whether  by  the 
War-Horse  or  by  the  Word  of  a  Strength  beyond  men”, 
his  words  have  either  a  mystic  significance  or  they  have 
no  coherent  meaning  at  all.  In  the  portions  translated  in 
this  book  we  have  many  mystic  verses  and  whole  hymns 
which,  however  mystic,  tear  the  veil  off  the  outer  sacri¬ 
ficial  images  covering  the  real  sense  of  the  Veda. 
“Thought”,  says  the  Rishi,  “has  nourished  for  us  human 
things  in  the  Immortals,  in  the  Great  Heavens;  it  is  the 


Xlll 


FOREWORD 


milch  cow  which  milks  of  itself  the  wealth  of  many  forms” 
— the  many  kinds  of  wealth,  cows,  horses  and  the  rest 
for  which  the  sacrificer  prays;  evidently  this  is  no  material 
wealth,  it  is  something  which  Thought,  the  Thought 
embodied  in  the  Mantra,  can  give  and  it  is  the  result 
of  the  same  Thought  that  nourishes  our  human  things 
in  the  Immortals,  in  the  Great  Heavens.  A  process  of 
divinisation,  and  of  a  bringing  down  of  great  and 
luminous  riches,  treasures  won  from  the  Gods  by  the 
inner  work  of  sacrifice,  is  hinted  at  in  terms  necessarily 
covert  but  still  for  one  who  knows  how  to  read  these 
secret  words,  ninya  vacamsi ,  sufficiently  expressive,  kavaye 
nivacana.  Again,  Night  and  Dawn  the  eternal  sisters  are 
like  “joyful  weaving  women  weaving  the  weft  of  our 
perfected  works  into  the  form  of  a  sacrifice.55  Again, 
words  with  a  mystic  form  and  meaning,  but  there  could 
hardly  be  a  more  positive  statement  of  the  psychological 
character  of  the  Sacrifice,  the  real  meaning  of  the  Cow,  of 
the  riches  sought  for,  the  plenitudes  of  the  Great  Treasure. 

Under  pressure  of  the  necessity  to  mask  their  meaning 
with  symbols  and  symbolic  words — for  secrecy  must  be 
observed — the  Rishis  resorted  to  fix  double  meanings,  a 
device  easily  manageable  in  the  Sanskrit  language  where 
one  word  often  bears  several  different  meanings,  but  not 
easy  to  render  in  an  English  translation  and  very  often 
impossible.  Thus  the  word  for  cow,  go ,  meant  also  light 
or  a  ray  of  light;  this  appears  in  the  names  of  some  of  the 
Rishis,  Gotama,  most  radiant,  Gavisthira,  steadfast  in  the 
Light.  The  cows  of  the  Veda  were  the  Herds  of  the  Sun, 
familiar  in  Greek  myth  and  mystery,  the  rays  of  the  Sun 
of  Truth  and  Light  and  Knowledge;  this  meaning 
which  comes  out  in  some  passages  can  be  consistently 
applied  everywhere  yielding  a  coherent  sense.  The  word 


xiv 


FOREWORD 


ghrta  means  ghee  or  clarified  butter  and  this  was  one 
of  the  chief  dements  of  the  sacrificial  rite;  but  ghrta  could 
also  mean  light,  from  the  root  ghr  to  shine  and  it  is  used 
in  this  sense  in  many  passages.  Thus  the  horses  of  Indra, 
the  Lord  of  Heaven,  are  described  as  dripping  with  light, 
ghrta-snu1— it  certainly  does  not  mean  that  ghee  dripped 
from  them  as  they  ran,  although  that  seems  to  be  the 
sense  of  the  same  epithet  as  applied  to  the  grain  of  which 
Indra’s  horses  are  invited  to  partake  when  they  come  to 
the  sacrifice.  Evidently  this  sense  of  light  doubles  with 
that  of  clarified  butter  in  the  symbolism  of  the  sacrifice. 
The  thought  or  the  word  expressing  the  thought  is  com¬ 
pared  to  pure  clarified  butter,  expressions  like  dhiyarh 
ghrtacim ,  the  luminous  thought  or  understanding  occur. 
There  is  a  curious  passage  in  one  of  the  hymns  translated 
in  this  book  calling  on  Fire  as  priest  of  the  sacrifice  to  flood 
the  offering  with  a  mind  pouring  ghrita,  ghrtaprusa  ma- 
nasa  and  so  manifest  the  Seats  (“places,  or  planes55),  the 
three  heavens  each  of  them  and  manifest  the  Gods.2 
But  what  is  a  ghee-pouring  mind,  and  how  by  pouring 
ghee  can  a  priest  manifest  the  Gods  and  the  triple  hea¬ 
vens?  But  admit  the  mystical  and  esoteric  meaning 
and  the  sense  becomes  clear.  What  the  Rishi  means  is 
a  “mind  pouring  the  light,55  a  labour  of  the  clarity  of 
an  enlightened  or  illumined  mind;  it  is  not  a  human 
priest  or  a  sacrificial  fire,  but  the  inner  Flame,  the  mystic 


1  Sayana,  though  in  several  passages  he  takes  ghrta  in  the  sense  of  light 
renders  it  here  by  ‘water’ ;  he  seems  to  think  that  the  divine  horses  were  very 
tired  and  perspiring  profusely!  A  Naturalistic  interpreter  might  as  well  argue 
that  as  Indra  is  a  God  of  the  sky,  the  primitive  poet  might  well  believe  that 
rain  was  the  perspiration  of  Indra’s  horses. 

2  This  is  Sayana’s  rendering  of  the  passage  and  rises  directly  from  the 
words. 


XV 


FOREWORD 


seer-will,  kavi  kratu ,  and  that  can  certainly  manifest  by 
this  process  the  Gods  and  the  worlds  and  all  planes 
of  the  being.  The  Rishis,  it  must  be  remembered,  were 
seers  as  well  as  sages,  they  were  men  of  vision  who  saw 
things  in  their  meditation  in  images,  often  symbolic 
images  which  might  precede  or  accompany  an  experience 
and  put  it  in  a  concrete  form,  might  predict  or  give  an 
occult  body  to  it:  so  it  would  be  quite  possible  for  him  to 
see  at  once  the  inner  experience  and  in  image  its  symbolic 
happening,  the  flow  of  clarifying  light  and  the  priest 
god  pouring  this  clarified  butter  on  the  inner  self-offering 
which  brought  the  experience.  This  might  seem  strange 
to  a  Western  mind,  but  to  an  Indian  mind  accustomed  to 
the  Indian  tradition  or  capable  of  meditation  and  occult 
vision  it  would  be  perfectly  intelligible.  The  mystics 
were  and  normally  are  symbolists,  they  can  even  see  all 
physical  things  and  happenings  as  symbols  of  inner 
truths  and  realities,  even  their  outer  selves,  the  outer 
happenings  of  their  life  and  all  around  them.  That 
would  make  their  identification  or  else  an  association 
of  the  thing  and  its  symbol  easy,  its  habit  possible. 

Other  standing  words  and  symbols  of  the  Veda  invite  a 
similar  interpretation  of  their  sense.  As  the  Vedic  “cow” 
is  the  symbol  of  light,  so  the  Vedic  “horse”  is  a  symbol 
of  power,  spiritual  strength,  force  of  tapasya.  When  the 
Rishi  asks  Agni  for  a  “horse-form  cow-in-front  gift” 
he  is  not  asking  really  for  a  number  of  horses  forming  a 
body  of  the  gift  with  some  cows  walking  in  front,  he  is 
asking  for  a  great  body  of  spiritual  power  led  by  the 
light  or,  as  we  may  translate  it,  “with  the  Ray-Cow 
walking  in  its  front.”  1  As  one  hymn  describes  the  recovery 

1  Compare  the  expression  which  describes  the  Aryan,  the  noble  people 
as  led  by  the  light —jyotir-agrah. 


XVI 


FOREWORD 


from  the  Panis  of  the  mass  of  the  rays  (the  cows, — the 
shining  herds,  gavyam ),  so  another  hymn  asks  Agni  for  a 
mass  or  abundance  or  power  of  the  horse — asvyam.  So 
too  the  Rishi  asks  sometimes  for  the  heroes  or  fighting 
men  as  his  retinue,  sometimes  in  more  abstract  language 
and  without  symbol  for  a  complete  hero-force — suviryam; 
sometimes  he  combines  the  symbol  and  the  thing.  So 
too  the  Rishis  ask  for  a  son  or  sons  or  offspring  apatyam 
— as  an  element  of  the  wealth  for  which  they  pray  to 
the  Gods,  but  here  too  an  esoteric  sense  can  be  seen, 
for  in  certain  passages  the  son  born  to  us  is  clearly  an  image 
of  some  inner  birth :  Agni  himself  is  our  son,  the  child  of 
our  works,  the  child  who  as  the  Universal  Fire  is  the 
father  of  his  fathers,  and  it  is  by  setting  the  steps  on  things 
that  have  fair  offspring  that  we  create  or  discover  a  path 
to  the  higher  world  of  Truth.  Again,  ‘water5  in  the  Veda 
is  used  as  a  symbol.  It  speaks  of  the  inconscient  ocean, 
salilam  apraketam,  in  which  the  Godhead  is  involved 
and  out  of  which  he  is  born  by  his  greatness ;  it  speaks  also 
of  the  great  ocean — maho  arnas ,  the  upper  waters  which, 
as  one  hymn  says,  Saraswati  makes  conscious  for  us  or 
of  which  she  makes  us  conscious  by  the  ray  of  intuition — 
pracetayati  ketuna.  The  seven  rivers  seem  to  be  the  rivers  of 
Northern  India  but  the  Veda  speaks  of  the  seven  Mighty 
Ones  of  Heaven  who  flow  down  from  Heaven;  they  are 
waters  that  know,  knowers  of  the  Truth — rtajha — and 
when  they  are  released  they  discover  for  us  the  road 
to  the  great  Heavens.  So,  too,  Parasara  speaks  of  Know¬ 
ledge  and  universal  Life,  “in  the  house  of  the  waters55. 
Indra  releases  the  rain  by  slaying  Vritra,  but  this  rain 
too  is  the  rain  of  Heaven  and  sets  the  rivers  flowing.  Thus 
the  legend  of  the  release  of  the  waters  which  takes  so  large 
a  place  in  the  Veda  puts  on  the  aspect  of  a  symbolic  myth. 

*2 


XVII 


FOREWORD 


Along  with  it  comes  the  other  symbolic  legend  of  the  dis¬ 
covery  and  rescue,  from  the  dark  cave  in  the  mountain,  of 
the  Sun,  the  cows  or  herds  of  the  Sun,  or  the  Sun-world 
— svar — by  the  Gods  and  the  Angiras  Rishis.  The  symbol 
of  the  Sun  is  constantly  associated  with  the  higher  Light 
and  the  Truth:  it  is  in  the  Truth  concealed  by  an  inferior 
Truth  that  are  unyoked  the  horses  of  the  Sun,  it  is  the  Sun 
in  its  highest  light  that  is  called  upon  in  the  great  Gayatri 
Mantra  to  impel  our  thoughts.  So,  too,  the  enemies  in  the 
Veda  are  spoken  of  as  robbers,  dasyus,  who  steal  the  cows, 
or  Vritras  and  are  taken  literally  as  human  enemies  in  the 
ordinary  interpretation,  but  Vritra  is  a  demon  who 
covers  and  holds  back  the  Light  and  the  waters  and  the 
Vritras  are  his  forces  fulfilling  that  function.  The  Dasyus, 
robbers  or  destroyers,  are  the  powers  of  darkness,  adver¬ 
saries  of  the  seekers  of  Light  and  the  Truth.  Always 
there  are  indications  that  lead  us  from  the  outward 
and  exoteric  to  an  inner  and  esoteric  sense. 

In  connection  with  the  symbol  of  the  Sun  a  notable 
and  most  significant  verse  in  a  hymn  of  the  fifth  Mandala 
may  here  be  mentioned ;  for  it  shows  not  only  the  profound 
mystic  symbolism  of  the  Vedic  poets,  but  also  how  the 
writers  of  the  Upanishads  understood  the  Rig  Veda  and 
justifies  their  belief  in  the  inspired  knowledge  of  their 
forerunners.  “There  is  a  Truth  covered  by  a  Truth,” 
runs  the  Vedic  passage,  “where  they  unyoke  the  horses 
of  the  Sun;  the  ten  hundreds  stood  together,  there  was 
That  One;1  I  saw  the  greatest  (best,  most  glorious)  of  the 
embodied  gods”.2  Then  mark  how  the  seer  of  the  Upa- 
nishad  translates  this  thought  or  this  mystic  experience 


1  or.  That  (the  supreme  Truth)  was  one, 

2  or,  it  means,  “I  saw  the  greatest  (best)  of  the  bodies  of  the  gods”. 

xviii 


FOREWORD 


into  his  own  later  style,  keeping  the  central  symbol  of  the 
Sun  but  without  any  secrecy  in  the  sense.  Thus  runs 
the  passage  in  the  Upanishad,  “The  face  of  the  Truth 
is  covered  with  a  golden  lid.  O  Pushan,  that  remove  for 
the  vision  of  the  law  of  the  Truth.1  O  Pushan  (fosterer), 
sole  seer,  O  Yama,  O  Sun,  O  Child  of  the  Father  of 
beings,  marshal  and  gather  together  thy  rays;  I  see 
the  Light  which  is  that  fairest  (most  auspicious)  form 
of  thee;  he  who  is  this  Purusha,  He  am  I.”  The  golden 
lid  is  meant  to  be  the  same  as  the  inferior  covering  truth, 
rtam ,  spoken  of  in  the  Vedic  verse;  the  “best  of  the  bodies 
of  the  Gods”  is  equivalent  to  the  “fairest  form  of  the 
Sun”,  it  is  the  supreme  Light  which  is  other  and  greater 
than  all  outer  light;  the  great  formula  of  the  Upanishad, 
“He  am  I”,  corresponds  to  That  One,  tad  ekam ,  of  the 
Rig  Vedic  verse;  the  “standing  together  of  the  ten 
hundreds”  (the  rays  of  the  Sun,  says  Sayana,  and  that 
is  evidently  the  meaning)  is  reproduced  in  the  prayer  to 
the  Sun  “to  marshal  and  mass  his  rays”  so  that  the 
supreme  form  may  be  seen.  The  Sun  in  both  the  passages, 
as  constantly  in  the  Veda  and  frequently  in  the  Upani¬ 
shad,  is  the  Godhead  of  the  supreme  Truth  and  Know¬ 
ledge  and  his  rays  are  the  light  emanating  from  that 
supreme  Truth  and  Knowledge.  It  is  clear  from  this 
instance — and  there  are  others — that  the  seer  of  the 
Upanishad  had  a  truer  sense  of  the  meaning  of  the 
ancient  Veda  than  the  mediaeval  ritualistic  commentator 
with  his  gigantic  learning,  much  truer  than  the  modern 
and  very  different  mind  of  the  European  scholars. 

There  are  certain  psychological  terms  which  have  to 
be  taken  consistently  in  their  true  sense  if  we  are  to  find 

1  or,  for  the  law  of  the  Truth,  for  vision. 


XIX 


FOREWORD 


the  inner  or  esoteric  meaning.  Apart  from  the  Truth, 
Ritam,  we  have  to  take  always  in  the  sense  of  “ thought’ 
the  word  dhl  which  constantly  recurs  in  the  hymns.  T-his 
is  the  natural  meaning  of  dhi  which  corresponds  to  the 
later  word  Buddhi;  it  means  thought,  understanding, 
intelligence  and  in  the  plural  ‘thoughts’,  dhiyah.  It  is 
given  in  the  ordinary  interpretation  all  kinds  of  meanings 
“water”,  “work”,  “sacrifice”,  “food”  etc.  as  well  as 
thought.  But  in  our  search  we  have  to  take  it  consistently 
in  its  ordinary  and  natural  significance  and  see  what  is 
the  result.  The  word  ketu  means  very  ordinarily 
“ray”  but  it  also  bears  the  meaning  of  intellect,  judgment 
or  an  intellectual  perception.  If  we  compare  the  passages 
in  the  Veda  in  which  it  occurs  we  can  come  to  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  it  meant  a  ray  of  perception  or  intuition,  as 
for  instance,  it  is  by  the  ray  of  intuition,  ketuna ,  that 
Saraswati  makes  us  conscious  of  the  great  waters;  that 
too  probably  is  the  meaning  of  the  rays  which  come 
from  the  Supreme  foundation  above  and  are  directed 
downwards;  these  are  the  intuitions  of  knowledge  as  the 
rays  of  the  Sun  of  Truth  and  Light.  The  word  kratu 
means  ordinarily  work  or  sacrifice  but  it  also  means 
intelligence,  power  or  resolution  and  especially  the  power 
of  the  intelligence  that  determines  the  work,  the  will. 
It  is  in  this  latter  sense  that  we  can  interpret  it  in  the 
esoteric  rendering  of  the  Veda.  Agni  is  a  seer- will,  kavi - 
kratu ,  he  is  the  “will  in  the  heart”,  kratu  hrdi.  Finally  the 
word  sravas  which  is  constantly  in  use  in  the  Veda  means 
fame,  it  is  also  taken  by  the  commentators  in  the  sense 
of  food,  but  these  significances  cannot  be  fitted  in  every¬ 
where  and  very  ordinarily  lack  all  point  and  apposite 
force.  But  sravas  comes  from  the  root  sru  to  hear  and  is 
used  in  the  sense  of  ear  itself  or  of  hymn  or  prayer — a 


xx 


FOREWORD 


sense  which  Sayana  accepts — and  from  this  we  can  infer 
that  it  means  the  “thing  heard’5  or  its  result  knowledge 
that  comes  to  us  through  hearing.  The  Rishis  speak  of 
themselves  as  hearers  of  the  Truth,  satyasrutah ,  and  the 
knowledge  received  by  this  hearing  as  Sruti.  It  is  in  this 
sense  of  inspiration  or  inspired  knowledge  that  we  can 
take  it  in  the  esoteric  meaning  of  the  Veda  and  we  find 
that  it  fits  in  with  a  perfect  appositeness;  thus  when 
the  Rishi  speaks  of  sravarhsi  as  being  brought  through 
upward  and  brought  through  downward,  this  cannot 
be  applied  to  food  or  fame  but  is  perfectly  apposite  and 
significant  if  he  is  speaking  of  inspirations  which  rise  up 
to  the  Truth  above  or  bring  down  the  Truth  to  us.  This 
is  the  method  we  can  apply  everywhere,  but  we  cannot 
pursue  the  subject  any  further  here.  In  the  brief  limits 
of  this  foreword  these  slight  indications  must  suffice; 
they  are  meant  only  to  give  the  reader  an  initial  insight 
into  the  esoteric  method  of  interpretation  of  the  Veda. 

But  what  then  is  the  secret  meaning,  the  esoteric 
sense,  which  emerges  by  this  way  of  understanding  the 
Veda?  It  is  what  we  would  expect  from  the  nature  of 
the  seeking  of  the  mystics  everywhere.  It  is  also  as  we 
should  expect  from  the  actual  course  of  the  development 
of  Indian  culture,  an  early  form  of  the  spiritual  truth 
which  found  its  culmination  in  the  Upanishads;  the 
secret  knowledge  of  the  Veda  is  the  seed  which  is  evolved 
later  on  into  the  Vedanta.  The  thought  around  which 
all  is  centred  is  the  seeking  after  Truth,  Light,  Immortal¬ 
ity.  There  is  a  Truth  deeper  and  higher  than  the  truth 
of  outward  existence,  a  Light  greater  and  higher  than 
the  light  of  human  understanding  which  comes  by 
revelation  and  inspiration,  an  immortality  towards  which 
the  soul  has  to  rise.  We  have  to  find  our  way  to  that, 


xxi 


FOREWORD 


to  get  into  touch  with  this  Truth  and  Immortality, 
sapanta  rtam  amrtam,1  to  be  born  into  the  Truth,  to  grow 
in  it,  to  ascend  in  spirit  into  the  world  of  Truth  and  to 
live  in  it.  To  do  so  is  to  unite  ourselves  with  the  Godhead 
and  to  pass  from  mortality  into  immortality.  This  is  the 
first  and  the  central  teaching  of  the  Vedic  mystics.  The 
Platonists,  developing  their  doctrine  from  the  early 
mystics,  held  that  we  live  in  relation  to  two  worlds, — a 
world  of  higher  truth  which  might  be  called  the  spiritual 
world  and  that  in  which  we  live,  the  world  of  the 
embodied  soul  which  is  derived  from  the  higher  but  also 
degraded  from  it  into  an  inferior  truth  and  inferior 
consciousness.  The  Vedic  mystics  held  this  doctrine  in 
a  more  concrete  and  pragmatic  form,  for  they  had  the 
experience  of  these  two  worlds.  There  is  the  inferior  truth 
here  of  this  world  mixed  as  it  is  with  much  falsehood  and 
error,  anrtasya  bhureh 2,  and  there  is  a  world  or  home  of 
Truth,  sadanam  rtasya :3,  the  Truth,  the  Right,  the  Vast, 
satyam  rtam  brhat ,4  where  all  is  Truth-conscious,  rtacit5 . 
There  are  many  worlds  between  up  to  the  triple  heavens 
and  their  lights  but  this  is  the  world  of  the  highest  Light 
— the  world  of  the  Sun  of  Truth,  svar ,  or  die  Great 
Heaven.  We  have  to  find  the  path  to  this  Great  Heaven, 
the  path  of  Truth,  rtasya  pantha 6,  or  as  it  is  sometimes 
called  the  way  of  the  gods.  This  is  the  second  mystic 
doctrine.  The  third  is  that  our  life  is  a  batde  between 
the  powers  of  Light  and  Truth,  the  Gods  who  are  the 


1  1. 68.  2. 

2  VII.  60.  5. 

2  I.  164.  47;  also  IV.  21.  3. 
4  Atharva  XII.  1.1. 

8  IV.  3.  4. 

4  III.  12.  7;  also  VII.  66.  3. 


XXII 


FOREWORD 


Immortals  and  the  powers  of  Darkness.  These  are 
spoken  of  under  various  names  as  Vritra  and  Vritras, 
Vala  and  the  Panis,  the  Dasyus  and  their  kings.  We  have 
to  call  in  the  aid  of  the  Gods  to  destroy  the  opposition 
of  these  powers  of  Darkness  who  conceal  the  Light 
from  us  or  rob  us  of  it,  who  obstruct  the  flowing  of 
the  streams  of  Truth,  rtasya  dharah,1  the  streams  of 
Heaven  and  obstruct  in  every  way  the  soul’s  ascent. 
We  have  to  invoke  the  Gods  by  the  inner  sacrifice,  and 
by  the  Word  call  them  into  us, — that  is  the  specific 
power  of  the  Mantra, — to  offer  to  them  the  gifts  of  the 
sacrifice  and  by  that  giving  secure  their  gifts,  so  that  by 
this  process  we  may  build  the  way  of  our  ascent  to  the 
goal.  The  elements  of  the  outer  sacrifice  in  the  Veda 
are  used  as  symbols  of  the  inner  sacrifice  and  self-offering ; 
we  give  what  we  are  and  what  we  have  in  order  that  the 
riches  of  the  divine  Truth  and  Light  may  descend  into 
our  life  and  become  the  elements  of  our  inner  birth  into 
the  Truth,— a  right  thinking,  a  right  understanding,  a 
right  action  must  develop  in  us  which  is  the  thinking, 
impulsion  and  action  of  that  higher  Truth,  rtasya  presa, 
rtasya  dhiti ,2  and  by  this  we  must  build  up  ourselves  in 
that  Truth.  Our  sacrifice  is  a  journey,  a  pilgrimage  and 
a  battle, — a  travel  towards  the  Gods  and  we  also  make 
that  journey  with  Agni,  the  inner  Flame,  as  our  path¬ 
finder  and  leader.  Our  human  things  are  raised  up  by  the 
mystic  Fire  into  the  immortal  being,  into  the  Great 
Heaven,  and  the  things  divine  come  down  into  us.  As 
the  doctrine  of  the  Rig  Veda  is  the  seed  of  the  teaching 
of  the  Vedanta,  so  is  its  inner  practice  and  discipline  a 


i  V.  12.  2;  also  VII.  43.  4. 
*  I.  68.  3. 


xxiii 


FOREWORD 


seed  of  the  later  practice  and  discipline  of  Yoga.  Finally, 
as  the  summit  Of  the  teaching  of  the  Vedic  mystics  comes 
the  secret  of  the  one  Reality,  ekam  sal,1  or  tad  ekam ,2  which 
became  the  central  word  of  the  Upanishads.  The  Gods, 
the  powers  of  Light  and  Truth  are  powers  and  names 
of  the  One,  each  God  is  himself  all  the  Gods  or  carries 
them  in  him :  there  is  the  one  Truth,  tat  satyarn ,3  and  one 
bliss  to  which  we  must  rise.  But  in  the  Veda  this  looks 
out  still  mostly  from  behind  the  veil.  There  is  much 
else  but  this  is  the  kernel  of  the  doctrine. 

The  interpretation  I  have  put  forward  was  set  out  at 
length  in  a  series  of  articles  with  the  title  “The  Secret  of 
the  Veda55  in  the  monthly  philosophical  magazine, 
“Arya”,  some  thirty  years  ago;  written  in  serial  form 
while  still  developing  the  theory  and  not  quite  complete 
in  its  scope  or  composed  on  a  preconceived  and  well- 
ordered  plan  it  was  not  published  in  book-form  and  is 
therefore  not  yet  available  to  the  reading  public.  It 
was  accompanied  by  a  number  of  renderings  of  the 
hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda  which  were  rather  interpretations 
than  translations  and  to  these  there  was  an  introduction 
explanatory  of  the  “Doctrine  of  the  Mystics55.  Subsc- 
quendy  there  was  planned  a  complete  translation  of  all 
the  hymns  to  Agni  in  the  ten  Mandalas  which  kept 
close  to  the  text;  the  renderings  of  those  hymns  in  the 
second  and  sixth  Mandalas  are  now  published  in  this 
book  for  the  first  time  as  well  as  a  few  from  the  first 
Mandala.  But  to  establish  on  a  scholastic  basis  the 
conclusions  of  the  hypothesis  it  would  have  been  necessary 
to  prepare  an  edition  of  the  Rig  Veda  or  of  a  large  part 

i  I  164.  46. 

3  X.  129.  2. 

8  III.  39.  5;  also  IV.  54.  4  and  VIII.  45.  27. 


XXIV 


FOREWORD 

of  it  with  a  word  by  word  construing  in  Sanskrit  and 
English,  notes  explanatory  of  important  points  in  the 
text  and  justifying  the  interpretation  both  of  separate 
words  and  of  whole  verses  and  also  elaborate  appendices 
to  fix  firmly  the  rendering  of  key-words  like  rtarh,  sravas, 
kratu,  ketu,  etc.  essential  to  the  esoteric  interpretation. 
This  also  was  planned,  but  meanwhile  greater  preoccu¬ 
pations  of  a  permanent  nature  intervened  and  no  time 
was  left  to  proceed  with  such  a  considerable  undertaking. 
For  the  benefit  of  the  reader  of  these  translations  who 
might  otherwise  be  at  a  loss,  this  foreword  has  been 
written  and  some  passages  from  the  unpublished  “Doc¬ 
trine  of  the  Mystics”  have  been  included.  The  text  of 
the  Veda  has  been  given  for  use  by  those  who  can  read 
the  original  Sanskrit.  These  translations  however  are 
not  intended  to  be  a  scholastic  work  meant  to  justify  a 
hypothesis;  the  object  of  this  publication  is  only  to  present 
them  in  a  permanent  form  for  disciples  and  those  who 
are  inclined  to  see  more  in  the  Vedas  than  a  superficial 
liturgy  and  would  be  interested  in  knowing  what  might 
be  the  esoteric  sense  of  this  ancient  Scripture. 

This  is  a  literary  and  not  a  strictly  literal  translation. 
But  a  fidelity  to  the  meaning,  the  sense  of  the  words  and 
the  structure  of  the  thought,  has  been  preserved:  in 
fact  the  method  has  been  to  start  with  a  bare  and  scru¬ 
pulously  exact  rendering  of  the  actual  language  and 
adhere  to  that  as  the  basis  of  the  interpretation;  for  it  is 
only  so  that  we  can  find  out  the  actual  thoughts  of  these 
ancient  mystics.  But  any  rendering  of  such  great  poetry 
as  the  hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda,  magnificent  in  their 
colouring  and  images,  noble  and  beautiful  in  rhythm, 
perfect  in  their  diction,  must,  if  it  is  not  to  be  a  merely 
dead  scholastic  work,  biing  at  least  a  faint  echo  of  their 


xxv 


FOREWORD 


poeticlforce, — more  cannot  be  done  in  a  prose  translation 
and  in  so  different  a  language.  The  turn  of  phrase  and 
the  syntax  of  English  and  Vedic  Sanskrit  are  poles 
asunder;  to  achieve  some  sense  of  style  and  natural  writing 
one  has  constantly  to  turn  the  concentrated  speech  of 
the  Veda  into  a  looser,  more  diluted  English  form. 
Another  stumbling-block  for  the  translator  is  the  ubi¬ 
quitous  double  entendre  marking  in  one  word  the  symbol 
and  the  thing  symbolised,  Ray  and  Cow,  clear  light  of 
the  mind  and  clarified  butter,  horses  and  spiritual  power; 
one  has  to  invent  phrases  like  the  “herds  of  the  light” 
or  “the  shining  herds”  or  to  use  devices  such  as  writing 
the  word  horse  with  a  capital  H  to  indicate  that  it  is  a 
symbolic  horse  that  is  meant  and  not  the  common  phy¬ 
sical  animal;  but  very  often  the  symbol  has  to  be  dropped, 
or  else  the  symbol  has  to  be  kept  and  the  inner  meaning 
left  to  be  understood1;  I  have  not  always  used  the  same 
phrase  though  always  keeping  the  same  sense,  but  varied 
the  translation  according  to  the  needs  of  the  passage. 
Often  I  have  been  unable  to  find  an  adequate  English 
word  which  will  convey  the  full  connotation  or  colour 
of  the  original  text;  I  have  used  two  words  instead  of 
one  or  a  phrase  or  resorted  to  some  other  device  to  give 
the  exact  and  complete  meaning.  Besides,  there  is  often 
a  use  of  antique  words  or  turns  of  language  of  which  the 
sense  is  not  really  known  and  can  only  be  conjectured  or 
else  different  renderings  are  equally  possible.  In  many 
passages  1  have  had  to  leave  a  provisional  rendering;  it 
was  intended  to  keep  the  final  decision  on  the  point 
until  the  time  when  a  more  considerable  body  of  the 

1  The  Rishis  sometimes  seem  to  combine  two  different  meanings  in  the 
same  word;  I  have  occasionally  tried  to  render  this  double  sense. 

xxvi 


Foreword 


hymns  had  been  translated  and  were  ready  for  publi¬ 
cation;  but  this  time  has  not:  yet  come. 

Sri  Aurobindo 


XXVll 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


(An  excerpt  from  the  Foreword  to  the  Hymns  of  the 
Airis  in  the  Arya) 

The  image  of  this  sacrifice  is  sometimes  that  of  a  journey 
or  voyage;  for  it  travels,  it  ascends;  it  has  a  goal — the 
vastness,  the  true  existence,  the  light,  the  felicity — and  it 
is  called  upon  to  discover  and  keep  to  the  good,  the 
straight  and  the  happy  path  to  the  goal,  the  arduous  yet 
joyful  road  of  the  Truth.  It  has  to  climb,  led  by  the  flam¬ 
ing  strength  of  the  divine  will,  from  plateau  to  plateau  as 
of  a  mountain,  it  has  to  cross  as  in  a  ship  the  waters  of 
existence,  traverse  its  rivers,  overcome  their  deep  pits 
and  rapid  currents ;  its  aim  is  to  arrive  at  the  far-off  ocean 
of  light  and  infinity. 

And  this  is  no  easy  or  peaceful  march;  it  is  for  long 
seasons  a  fierce  and  relentless  battle.  Constantly  the 
Aryan  man  has  to  labour  and  to  fight  and  conquer;  he 
must  be  a  tireless  toiler  and  traveller  and  a  stern  warrior, 
he  must  force  open  and  storm  and  sack  city  after  city, 
win  kingdom  after  kingdom,  overthrow  and  tread  down 
ruthlessly  enemy  after  enemy.  His  whole  progress  is  a  war¬ 
ring  of  Gods  and  Titans,  Gods  and  Giants,  Indra  and  the 
Python,  Aryan  and  Dasyu.  Aryan  adversaries  even  he 
has  to  face  in  the  open  field;  for  old  friends  and  helpers 
turn  into  enemies;  the  kings  of  Aryan  States  whom  he 
would  conquer  and  overpass  join  themselves  to  the 

xxviii 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


Dasyus  and  are  leagued  against  him  in  supreme  battle 
to  prevent  his  free  and  utter  passing  on. 

But  the  Dasyu  is  the  natural  enemy.  These  dividers, 
plunderers,  harmful  powers,  these  Danavas,  sons  of  the 
Mother  of  division,  are  spoken  of  by  the  Rishis  under 
many  general  appellations.  There  are  Rakshasas;  there 
are  Eaters  and  Devourers,  Wolves  and  Tearers;  there 
are  hurters  and  haters;  there  are  dualisers;  there  are 
confiners  or  censurers.  But  we  are  given  also  many 
specific  names.  Vritra,  the  Serpent,  is  the  grand  Adver¬ 
sary  ;  for  he  obstructs  with  his  coils  of  darkness  all  possi¬ 
bility  of  divine  existence  and  divine  action.  And  even 
when  Vritra  is  slain  by  the  light,  fiercer  enemies  arise  out 
of  him.  Sushna  afflicts  us  with  his  impure  and  ineffective 
force,  Namuchi  fights  man  by  his  weaknesses,  and  others 
too  assail,  each  with  his  proper  evil.  Then  there  are  Vala 
and  the  Panis,  miser  traffickers  in  the  sense-life,  stealers 
and  concealers  of  the  higher  Light  and  its  illuminations 
which  they  can  only  darken  and  misuse, — an  impious 
host  who  are  jealous  of  their  store  and  will  not  offer  sacri¬ 
fice  to  the  Gods.  These  and  other  personalities — they 
are  much  more  than  personifications — of  our  ignorance, 
evil,  weakness  and  many  limitations  make  constant  war 
upon  man;  they  encircle  him  from  near  or  they  shoot  their 
arrows  at  him  from  afar  or  even  dwell  in  his  gated  house 
in  the  place  of  the  Gods  and  with  their  shapeless  stam¬ 
mering  mouths  and  their  insufficient  breath  of  force  mar 
his  self-expression.  They  must  be  expelled,  overpowered, 
slain,  thrust  down  into  their  nether  darkness  by  the  aid 
of  the  mighty  and  helpful  deities. 

The  Vedic  deities  are  names,  powers,  personalities  of 
the  universal  Godhead  and  they  represent  each  some 
essential  puissance  of  the  Divine  Being.  They  manifest 


xxix 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


the  cosmos  and  are  manifest  in  it.  Children  of  Light, 
Sons  of  the  Infinite,  they  recognise  in  the  soul  of  man 
their  brother  and  ally  and  desire  to  help  and  increase  him 
by  themselves  increasing  in  him  so  as  to  possess  his  world 
with  their  light,  strength  and  beauty.  The  Gods  call  man 
to  a  divine  companionship  and  alliance;  they  attract 
and  uplift  him  to  their  luminous  fraternity,  invite  his  aid 
and  offer  theirs  against  the  Sons  of  Darkness  and  Division. 
Man  in  return  calls  the  Gods  to  his  sacrifice,  offers  to  them 
his  swiftnesses  and  his  strengths,  his  clarities  and  his 
sweetnesses, — milk  and  butter  of  the  shining  Cow,  distilled 
juices  of  the  Plant  of  Joy,  the  Horse  of  the  Sacrifice,  the 
cake  and  the  wine,  the  grain  for  the  God-Mind’s  radi¬ 
ant  coursers.  He  receives  them  into  his  being  and  their 
gifts  into  his  life,  increases  them  by  the  hymns  and  the 
wine  and  forms  perfectly — as  a  smith  forges  iron,  says 
the  Veda — their  great  and  luminous  godheads. 

All  this  Vedic  imagery  is  easy  to  understand  when 
once  we  have  the  key,  but  it  must  not  be  mistaken  for 
mere  imagery.  The  Gods  are  not  simply  poetical  per¬ 
sonifications  of  abstract  ideas  or  of  psychological  and 
physical  functions  of  Nature.  To  the  Vedic  seers  they  are 
living  realities;  the  vicissitudes  of  the  human  soul 
represent  a  cosmic  struggle  not  merely  of  principles  and 
tendencies  but  of  the  cosmic  Powers  which  support  and 
embody  them.  These  are  the  Gods  and  the  Demons.  On 
the  world-stage  and  in  the  individual  soul  the  same  real 
drama  with  the  same  personages  is  enacted. 

★  ★  ★ 

To  what  gods  shall  the  sacrifice  be  offered?  Who  shall 
be  invoked  to  manifest  and  protect  in  the  human  being 
this  increasing  godhead? 


XXX 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


Agni  first,  for  without  him  the  sacrificial  flame  cannot 
burn  on  the  altar  of  the  soul.  That  flame  of  Agni  is  the 
seven-tongued  power  of  the  Will,  a  Force  of  God  instinct 
with  Knowledge.  This  conscious  and  forceful  will  is  the 
immortal  guest  in  our  mortality,  a  pure  priest  and  a 
divine  worker,  the  mediator  between  earth  and  heaven. 
It  carries  what  we  offer  to  the  higher  Powers  and  brings 
back  in  return  their  force  and  light  and  joy  into  our 
humanity. 

Indra,  the  Puissant  next,  who  is  the  power  of  pure 
Existence  self-manifested  as  the  Divine  Mind.  As  Agni 
is  one  pole  of  Force  instinct  with  knowledge  that  sends 
its  current  upward  from  earth  to  heaven,  so  Indra  is  the 
other  pole  of  Light  instinct  with  force  which  descends 
from  heaven  to  earth.  He  comes  down  into  our  world 
as  the  Hero  with  the  shining  horses  and  slays  darkness 
and  division  with  his  lightnings,  pours  down  the  life- 
giving  heavenly  waters,  finds  in  the  trace  of  the  hound, 
Intuition,  the  lost  or  hidden  illuminations,  makes  the  Sun 
of  Truth  mount  high  in  the  heaven  of  our  mentality. 

Surya,  the  Sun,  is  the  master  of  that  supreme  Truth, 
— truth  of  being,  truth  of  knowledge,  truth  of  process  and 
act  and  movement  and  functioning.  He  is  therefore  the 
creator  or  rather  the  manifester  of  all  things — for  creation 
is  out-bringing,  expression  by  the  Truth  and  Will — and 
the  father,  fosterer,  enlightener  of  our  souls.  The  illu¬ 
minations  we  seek  are  the  herds  of  this  Sun  who  comes 
to  us  in  the  track  of  the  divine  Dawn  and  releases  and 
reveals  in  us  night-hidden  world  after  world  up  to  the 
highest  Beatitude. 

Of  that  beatitude  Soma  is  the  representative  deity. 
The  wine  of  his  ecstasy  is  concealed  in  the  growths  of 
earth,  in  the  waters  of  existence ;  even  here  in  our  physical 


XXXI 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


being  are  his  immortalising  juices  and  they  have  to  be 
pressed  out  and  offered  to  all  the  gods ;  for  in  that  strength 
these  shall  increase  and  conquer. 

Each  of  these  primary  deities  has  others  associated 
with  him  who  fulfil  functions  that  arise  from  his  own. 
For  if  the  truth  of  Surya  is  to  be  established  firmly  in 
our  mortal  nature,  there  are  previous  conditions  that  are 
indispensable;  a  vast  purity  and  clear  wideness  destruc¬ 
tive  of  all  sin  and  crooked  falsehood, — and  this  is  Varuna; 
a  luminous  power  of  love  and  comprehension  leading  and 
forming  into  harmony  all  our  thoughts,  acts  and  impulses, 
— this  is  Mitra;  an  immortal  puissance  of  clear-discerning 
aspiration  and  endeavour, — this  is  Aryaman;  a  happy 
spontaneity  of  the  right  enjoyment  of  all  things  dispelling 
the  evil  dream  of  sin  and  error  and  suffering, — this  is 
Bhaga.  These  four  are  powers  of  the  Truth  of  Surya. 

For  the  whole  bliss  of  Soma  to  be  established  perfectly 
in  our  nature  a  happy  and  enlightened  and  unmaimed 
condition  of  mind,  vitality  and  body  is  necessary.  This 
condition  is  given  to  us  by  the  twin  Aswins;  wedded  to 
the  daughter  of  Light,  drinkers  of  honey,  bringers  of 
perfect  satisfactions,  healers  of  maim  and  malady  they 
occupy  our  parts  of  knowledge  and  parts  of  action  and 
prepare  our  mental,  vital  and  physical  being  for  an  easy 
and  victorious  ascension. 

Indra,  the  Divine  Mind,  as  the  shaper  of  mental  forms 
has  for  his  assistants,  his  artisans,  the  Ribhus,  human 
powers  who  by  the  work  of  sacrifice  and  their  brilliant 
ascension  to  the  high  dwelling-place  of  the  Sun  have 
attained  to  immortality  and  help  mankind  to  repeat  their 
achievement.  They  shape  by  the  mind  Indra’s  horses, 
the  chariot  of  the  Aswins,  the  weapons  of  the  Gods,  all 
the  means  of  the  journey  and  the  battle.  But  as  giver  of 


XXXll 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


the  Light  of  Truth  and  as  Vritra-slayer  Indra  is  aided  by 
the  Maruts,  who  are  powers  of  will  and  nervous  or  vital 
Force  that  have  attained  to  the  light  of  thought  and  the 
voice  of  self-expression.  They  are  behind  all  thought  and 
speech  as  its  impellers  and  they  battle  towards  the  Light, 
Truth  and  Bliss  of  the  supreme  Consciousness. 

There  are  also  female  energies;  for  the  Deva  is  both 
Male  and  Female  and  the  gods  also  are  either  activising 
souls  or  passively  executive  and  methodising  energies. 
Aditi,  infinite  Mother  of  the  Gods,  comes  first;  and  there 
are,  besides,  five  powers  of  the  Truth-consciousness, — Mahi 
or  Bharati,  the  vast  Word  that  brings  us  all  things  out 
of  the  divine  source;  Ila  the  strong  primal  word  of  the 
Truth  who  gives  us  its  active  vision;  Saraswati,  its  stream¬ 
ing  current  and  the  word  of  its  inspiration;  Sarama, 
the  Intuition,  hound  of  heaven  who  descends  into  the 
cavern  of  the  subconscient  and  finds  there  the  concealed 
illuminations;  Dakshina,  whose  function  is  to  discern 
rightly,  dispose  the  action  and  the  offering  and  distribute 
in  the  sacrifice  to  each  godhead  its  portion.  Each  god, 
too,  has  his  female  energy. 

All  this  action  and  struggle  and  ascension  is  supported 
by  Heaven  our  Father  and  Earth  our  Mother,  Parents  of 
the  Gods,  who  sustain  respectively  the  purely  mental  and 
psychic  and  the  physical  consciousness.  Their  large  and 
free  scope  is  the  condition  of  our  achievement.  Vayu, 
master  of  life,  links  them  together  by  the  mid-air,  the 
legion  of  vital  force.  And  there  are  other  deities, — Par- 
janya,  giver  of  the  rain  of  heaven;  Dadhikravan,  the 
divine  war-horse,  a  power  of  Agni ;  the  mystic  Dragon  of 
the  Foundations;  Trita  Aptya  who  on  the  third  plane 
of  existence  consummates  our  triple  being;  and  more 
besides. 

a3  xxxiii 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


The  development  of  all  these  godheads  is  necessary  to 
our  perfection.  And  that  perfection  must  be  attained  on 
all  our  levels in  the  wideness  of  earth,  our  physical  being 
and  consciousness;  in  the  full  force  of  vital  speed  and 
action  and  enjoyment  and  nervous  vibration,  typified 
as  the  Horse  which  must  be  brought  forward  to  upbear 
our  endeavour;  in  the  perfect  gladness  of  the  heart  of 
emotion  and  a  brilliant  heat  and  clarity  of  the  mind 
throughout  our  intellectual  and  psychical  being;  in  the 
coming  of  the  supramental  Light,  the  Dawn  and  the 
Sun  and  the  shining  Mother  of  the  herds,  to  transform 
all  our  existence;  for  so  comes  to  us  the  possession  of 
the  Truth,  by  the  Truth  the  admirable  surge  of  the 
Bliss,  in  the  Bliss  infinite  Consciousness  of  absolute 
being. 

Three  great  Gods,  origin  of  the  Puranic  Trinity, 
largest  puissances  of  the  supreme  Godhead,  make  possible 
this  development  and  upward  evolution;  they  supporc 
in  its  grand  lines  and  fundamental  energies  all  these 
complexities  of  the  cosmos.  Brahmanaspati  is  the  Creatoi , 
by  the  word,  by  his  cry  he  creates — that  is  to  say,  he 
expresses,  he  brings  out  all  existence  and  conscious 
knowledge  and  movement  of  life  and  eventual  forms 
from  the  darkness  of  the  lnconscient.  Rudra,  the 
Violent  and  Merciful,  the  Mighty  One,  presides  over 
the  struggle  of  life  to  affirm  itself;  he  is  the  armed,  wrath¬ 
ful  and  beneficent  Power  of  God  who  lifts  forcibly  the 
creation  upward,  smites  all  that  opposes,  scourges  all 
that  errs  and  resists,  heals  all  that  is  wounded  and  suffers 
and  complains  and  submits.  Vishnu  of  the  vast  pervading 
motion  holds  in  his  triple  stride  all  these  worlds;  it  is  he 
that  makes  a  wide  room  for  the  action  of  Indra  in  our 
limited  mortality;  it  is  by  him  and  with  him  that  we 


xxxiv 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


rise  into  his  highest  seats  where  we  find  waiting  for  us 
the  Friend,  the  Beloved,  the  Beatific  Godhead. 

Our  earth,  shaped  out  of  the  dark  inconscient  ocean 
of  existence,  lifts  its  high  formations  and  ascending  peaks 
heavenward;  heaven  of  mind  has  its  own  formations, 
clouds  that  give  out  their  lightnings  and  their  waters 
of  life;  the  streams  of  the  clarity  and  the  honey  ascend 
out  of  the  subconscient  ocean  below  and  seek  the  super- 
conscient  ocean  above;  and  from  above  that  ocean 
sends  downward  its  rivers  of  the  light  and  truth  and 
bliss  even  into  our  physical  being.  Thus  in  images  of 
physical  Nature  the  Vedic  poets  sing  the  hymn  of  our 
spiritual  ascension. 

That  ascension  has  already  been  effected  by  the 
Ancients,  the  human  forefathers,  and  the  spirit  of  these 
great  Ancestors  still  assists  their  offspring;  for  the  new 
dawns  repeat  the  old  and  lean  forward  in  light  to  join 
the  dawns  of  the  future.  Kanwa,  Kutsa,  Atri,  Kakshiwan, 
Gotama,  Sunahsepa  have  become  types  of  certain 
spiritual  victories  which  tend  to  be  constantly  repeated 
in  the  experience  of  humanity.  The  seven  sages,  the 
Angirasas,  are  waiting  still  and  always,  ready  to  chant 
the  word,  to  rend  the  cavern,  to  find  the  lost  herds,  to 
recover  the  hidden  Sun.  Thus  the  soul  is  a  battlefield 
full  of  helpers  and  hurters,  friends  and  enemies.  All 
this  lives,  teems,  is  personal,  is  conscious,  is  active.  We 
create  for  ourselves  by  the  sacrifice  and  by  the  word 
shining  seers,  heroes  to  fight  for  us,  children  of  our  works. 
The  Rishis  and  the  Gods  find  for  us  our  luminous  herds; 
the  Ribhus  fashion  by  the  mind  the  chariots  of  the  gods 
and  their  horses  and  their  shining  weapons.  Our  life 
is  a  horse  that  neighing  and  galloping  bears  us  onward 
and  upward ;  its  forces  are  swift-hoofed  steeds,  the  libera- 


xxxv 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  MYSTICS 


ted  powers  of  the  mincl  are  wide- winging  birds;  this 
mental  being  or  this  soul  is  the  upsoaring  Swan  or  the 
Falcon  that  breaks  out  from  a  hundred  iron  walls  and 
wrests  from  the  jealous  guardians  of  felicity  the  wine 
of  the  Soma.  Every  shining  godward  Thought  that 
arises  from  the  secret  abysses  of  the  heart  is  a  priest  and 
a  creator  and  chants  a  divine  hymn  of  luminous  realisa¬ 
tion  and  puissant  fulfilment.  We  seek  for  the  shining  gold 
of  the  Truth;  we  lust  after  a  heavenly  treasure. 

The  soul  of  man  is  a  world  full  of  beings,  a  kingdom 
in  which  armies  clash  to  help  or  hinder  a  supreme  con¬ 
quest,  a  house  where  the  gods  are  our  guests  and  which 
the  demons  strive  to  possess;  the  fullness  of  its  energies 
and  wideness  of  its  being  make  a  seat  of  sacrifice  spread, 
arranged  and  purified  for  a  celestial  session. 

Such  are  some  of  the  principal  images  of  the  Veda 
and  a  very  brief  and  insufficient  outline  of  the  teaching 
of  the  Forefathers.  So  understood  the  Rig  Veda  ceases 
to  be  an  obscure,  confused  and  barbarous  hymnal;  it 
becomes  the  high-aspiring  Song  of  Humanity ;  its  chants 
are  episodes  of  the  lyrical  epic  of  the  soul  in  its  immortal 
ascension. 

This  at  least;  what  more  there  may  be  in  the  Veda 
of  ancient  science,  lost  knowledge,  old  psycho-physical 
tradition  remains  yet  to  be  discovered. 


XXXVI 


MANDALA  ONE 


% 

f 

w 

S 

A 

.a 

1 

11 

$ 

•3 

31 

i 

/M 

3 

,2J 

(o 

£ 

11*11  ujaau  5^  a  I  liJIKIJJi  ifeshlib  fc  btK 


% 

2» 

I 

| 

9-U 

I 

aj 


3 

I 

iU 


3 

•SP 

Cvq 

& 

.oJp 

24. 


sr 

f 


-3 

a 

/M. 


3| 

-3 

/* 


i 


(5 

e 

i 


d|^ 

£ 

W 


VAISHWAMITRA  MADHUCHHANDAS 


Sukta  1 


1.  I  adore  the  flame,  the  vicar,  the  divine  Ritwik  of 
the  Sacrifice,  the  summoner  who  most  founds  the  ecstasy. 

2.  The  Flame  adorable  by  the  ancient  sages  is  adorable 
too  by  the  new.  He  brings  here  the  Gods. 

3.  By  the  flame  one  enjoys  a  treasure  that  verily 
increases  day  by  day,  glorious,  most  full  of  hero-power. 

4.  O  Flame!  the  pilgrim-sacrifice  on  every  side  of 
which  thou  art  with  the  envisioning  being,  that  truly 
goes  among  the  Gods. 

5.  The  Flame,  the  summoner,  the  Seer-Will,  true  and 
most  full  of  richly  varied  listenings,  may  he  come  a 
God  with  the  Gods. 

6.  O  Flame!  the  happy  good  which  thou  shalt  create 
for  the  giver  is  that  Truth  and  verily  thine,  O  Angiras! 

7.  To  thee,  O  Flame!  we  day  by  day,  in  the  night 
and  in  the  light,  come,  carrying  by  our  thought  the 
obeisance. 


3 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


ntTRcTFT  l 

crgTTCT  F%  3W  lUill 

H:  ^FcTC  U<UI 

^nfrtfa:  TEJT 

3rfa  c^f  g’jfbT^  ffolTT  I  3THI  T^TFI  5^3^ 

3#HTlfTH  HTT  5Sf?cT  fawfim  I  $«M4I*S  ^fxMM  IIRU 


3TR  f^T  ^  'STrTTRt 

l  3Tf%T  ftm  ?T  f^J:  I^M 

cIT  T5I?ft  fa  SftMT  !RH  TTf?T  ^TR 

i  5#tt  *rfcH  goffer  11*11 

qcTT^TT  Slfeef:  srfd  felctt 

I  3TT^  &  ?%TffcR:  ll^ll 

4 


MANDALA  ONE 


8.  To  thee,  who  reignest  over  our  pilgrim-sacrifices, 
luminous  guardian  of  the  Truth,  increasing  in  thy  own 
home. 

9.  Therefore,  be  easy  of  access  to  us  as  a  father  unto 
his  son,  cling  to  us  for  our  happy  state. 


MEDHATITHI  KANWA 
SUKTA  12 

1.  We  choose  Agni,  the  summoner,  the  all-knowing, 
the  messenger,  the  will  effective  of  this  sacrifice. 

2.  To  the  Lord  of  the  creatures,  the  bearer  of  our 
offerings,  the  beloved  of  Many,  to  every  flame  the  sacri- 
ficers  ever  call  with  hymns  that  summon  the  Gods,  One 
in  whom  are  many  dear  things. 

3.  O  Fire,  thou  being  born  hither  bear  the  Gods  for 
the  sacrificer  who  spreads  the  holy  seat,  thou  art  our 
desirable  summoning  priest. 

4.  O  Fire,  when  thou  goest  as  our  envoy,  awaken 
them  up  who  desire  our  offerings.  Take  thy  seat  with  the 
Gods  on  the  holy  grass. 

5.  O  Fire,  thou  who  art  called  by  the  offerings  of 
clarity,  thou  shining  one,  do  thou  oppose  and  burn 
down  the  haters  that  confine. 


5 


9 


Hill  fe  KjJg  3?l?.lh  1 

tile  ik|  lie  Jfc*  (phJttS 

U  <&& 

tfcnltfe 

:W^ 

UfcjH  :k  feihis  h|j^  hi  l 

:HjPj3bi>hjlbtbj  lXXpiS  lflihfe  k±K 

II  i  >H  KtaHJ\Pb>lb  xp.  | 

ipi^pp  IfiKhlU  lit  lie  HPPi  :k  & 

iloiu  :fe  £&yl!  j*b  h£  I 

h  UtS\bfrj\j>  (fcblh  :j±  h 

ll'bll  <*>blh  hit  1 

tjmidtjli?  IhaXjl  hPith^  tip  IX 

ll?ll  Xh  ihXJUS  hi  hit  1 

PJhtP  xx  PXPjtoEJli  PihlE^h 

II6MI  Win^hht.^  | 

>^h!r>phttt  £j§i  hhtijhxp 

ll^ll  :faJil!£fr  giXXal  1 

tbhPjhfrubj*  jpahjh  -PiJIPPiJle 

3HI3  OIXSAPi  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MAndala  one 


6.  By  the  fire  is  the  fire  perfectly  kindled,  the  seer,  the 
lord  of  the  house,  the  youth,  the  bearer  of  offering  whose 
mouth  receives  the  offerings. 

7.  To  the  divine  flame,  the  seer,  him  whose  law  of  being 
is  the  Truth,  the  shining  one,  the  destroyer  of  all  evils, 
approach  and  chant  the  hymn  of  praise. 

8.  O  Flame,  O  divine  messenger,  the  lord  of  the  offer¬ 
ings  who  waits  on  thee,  of  him  become  the  protector. 

9.  He  who  with  the  offerings  approaches  the  divine  force, 
for  the  Birth  of  the  Gods,  O  Purifier,  on  him  have  grace. 

10.  O  shining  flame,  thou  who  purifiest,  hither  bear 
the  Gods  to  our  offerings  and  to  our  sacrifice. 

11.  Thou  adored  by  our  fresh  Gayatri  rhythms  bring 
for  the  felicity  and  force  full  of  hero’s  strength. 

12.  O  fire,  with  thy  lustres  white,  and  all  thy  divine 
hymns  that  summon  the  Gods,  come  and  accept  this 
hymn  that  we  affirm. 


MEDHATITHI  KANYVA 
SUKTA  13 

1.  O  Fire!  perfectly  kindled,  bear  the  gods  to  him 
who  has  the  offerings,  O  Thou  who  purifiest!  Thou 
summoner!  sacrifice  to  the  gods. 


7 


8 


llfcll  fe]  iMit  Hiih 

I  ilMl|  |nynfe  Ml  11M  IS 


UbU  t2ki&  iiMM  IMJtt  IMMJlIl  lbJ±S  ISte  lb  M2  tt 

I  M  itfeMJ  p.il|ii  iMJi  Mijte  lftlkte 


Ml  II  ml  laMh^M  h  Hijte 

|  Wl^Phb^  Itfcbj  Mi"3>K  Mm  Jfe  is 

£& 

:iya  tfcrxfc 


I|V)||  klateM  teMhlfcl?  I  :infaj^fali  fiahMS  ithH>,£jfe  Hli&Mi 


11*11  1M^  HJie  I  £m  lie  H22J|  IMS  tei  Mite 


Ufell  ttRfotejj  Mtejbh  I  mM.  b£  MM  khiJMMlSJ 


Mhu  bMys  %L&  l&te  I  fci  :t  ki  p  khMMM  MihMh 


3HIJ  OIJ.SAl-M  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


2  O  son  of  the  body!  Now  make  the  sacrifice  honied 
for  the  gods  (or  full  of  honey  among  the  gods)  for  their 
enjoyment,  O  seer. 

3.  Him,  the  beloved,  I  call  hither  to  this  sacrifice,  he 
who  creates  the  offerings,  possessed  of  honied  tongue. 

4.  O  Fire!  Thou  who  art  adored,  bring  here  the  gods 
in  thy  happiest  car;  (for)  thou  art  the  summoner  establi¬ 
shed  by  man. 

5.  O  Thinkers!  spread  you  the  holy  seat  continuous 
and  true  in  order,  sprinkled  with  clear  offerings  (of  clari¬ 
fied  butter),  to  where  is  the  vision  of  immortality. 


KANWA  GHAURA 
Sukta  36 

1.  The  master  of  many  peoples  who  labour  towards 
the  godhead,  we  seek  for  you  with  words  of  perfect 
expression,  Agni  whom  others  also  everywhere  desire. 

2.  Men  hold  Agni  in  them  as  the  increaser  of  strength. 
With  offerings  we  dispose  the  sacrifice  for  thee,  do  thou 
then  become  today  to  us  perfect-minded  and  our  keeper 
here  in  our  havings,  O  thou  who  art  of  the  truth  of  being. 

3.  Thee  we  choose  out  for  our  messenger,  the  priest  of 
offering  who  hast  universal  knowledge;  when  thou  art 
greatened  in  thy  being  thy  flames  range  wide,  thy  lustres 
touch  the  heavens. 


9 


HPp  rniiis  tahhj  hitie  kthak  Jsj 
I  feafcys  yye  jlit  hX£U±  it 


fa-aajtejit  r^imafl  im>  %nx  kfek 

l  ^fcjp  tiMS  k£  hie  yihji  P>Phl4»  yitba 


:h&J  yjie  IP^PJPj  yhihJH  :hkt  h;j>Kjlhyi 
I  ^PiktM>b->  h£  hhijitk  lteityk  £ 


ynt&ate^  tejh  >hiP(N  iPkfc  ale  y*  fei  & 
\  :k£  yfc£  ihhihj  fcsafejfc  hhS  ktii  %i 


Bten&te  ixx  tjih  ihfe  mis  pjmuft  yi 

I  BjhiiiJEj  y^  hf>PJh£h  ys±h 


:^n  itit>*>  ^ih  tfe  ihP->  Pjhitv  khte  yi  PtPj 

i  ytsityhih  y£  &  Jitrne  yuy  yafcfe  ipnmpy 


'JUKI  OIXSAJ-V  3H.I.  OX  S'NWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


4.  The  gods  even  Varuna  and  Mitra  and  Aryaman  light 
thee  utterly,  the  ancient  messenger;  all  wealth  that  mortal 
conquers  by  thee,  O  Agni,  who  to  thee  has  given. 


5.  Thou  art  the  rapturous  priest  of  the  sacrifice  and 
master  of  this  house  and  the  envoy  of  creatures;  in  thee 
are  met  together  all  the  steadfast  laws  of  action  which  the 
gods  have  made. 

6.  It  is  in  thee,  O  Agni,  young  and  mighty,  because 
thou  art  rich  in  joy  that  every  offering  is  cast,  therefore 
do  thou  today  and  hereafter,  perfect  of  mind,  offer  to  the 
gods  perfected  energies. 


7.  He  it  is,  whom  as  the  self-ruler  men  who  have 
attained  submission  adore;  by  the  greatness  of  the  oblation 
men  light  entirely  Agni  when  they  have  broken  through 
their  opposers. 


8.  They  smite  Vritra  the  coverer  and  pass  beyond  the 
two  firmaments,  and  they  make  the  wide  kingdom  their 
home.  May  the  mighty  One  become  in  Kanwa  a  luminous 
energy  fed  with  the  offerings,  the  Steed  of  Life  neighing 
in  the  pastures  (stations)  of  the  kine. 

9.  Take  thy  established  seat;  wide  art  thou,  shine  in  thy 
purity  revealing  utterly  the  godhead ;  pour  forth,  O  thou 
of  the  sacrifice,  thy  red  active  smoke  of  passion,  thou 
wide-manifested,  that  full  of  vision. 


11 


n^in 


h-<?3E>jb  lb  bb  Ph\>  Ijlh 

I  :int>i»Pfa  Bjlh  :bi&X  bite  Jb  Bjlb 


llxil)  :bl  *b  b£S  ifebj  ^b\js  mtoifesjlaag  b  ^ 
I  labjbb  b£bj  ib&%  bj  Jblilib  :b  JteaJE 


nein  |bibSb^jbjbbjb£jbb  ibbjb  wjr  jba<£ 

I  ibbjb  b  Jb|  i^pj  hptp  in  b  S£  baS£ 


Htili  itjte  lib  Eh  |bb  b]k-i>  bibbs  bibib  bi 

I  hbilbafeb  biSb  £j  hiJSlfelhbi  hjfofrl.>. 


Hi  ill  hjklbbb  hijhbihit  IhbjbibSJlfe  Jhb  bib 

I  hJElbfo  b|  bai  :fcjhjlb3^  bijhb 


II o  i  ||  :u^hhh  lbb  b  hhibhfcjhjibali  Jbbfe  b 

l  bSibhsS  2abjb  kybb  £bh  Jhlb^  lib  b 


aau  oixsaia;  am  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  ONE 


10.  Even  thou  whom  the  gods  have  set  here  for  man 
most  strong  for  the  sacrifice,  O  bearer  of  the  offering, 
whom  Kanwa  Medhyatithi  has  established  as  a  seizer  for 
him  of  his  desired  wealth,  whom  the  mighty  Indra  and 
all  who  establish  him  by  the  song  of  praise ; 


11.  Even  that  Agni  whom  Medhyatithi  Kanwa  has 
kindled  high  upon  the  Truth,  may  his  impulses  blaze 
forth,  him  may  these  fulfilling  Words,  him,  even  Agni, 
may  we  increase. 

12.  Complete  our  felicities,  O  thou  who  hast  the  self¬ 
fixity;  for  with  thee,  O  Agni,  is  effectivity  in  the  gods; 
thou  rulest  over  the  wealth  of  inspired  knowledge.  Show 
thou  then  favour  to  us,  great  art  thou. 


13.  Utterly  high  uplifted  stand  for  our  growth,  like 
the  god  Savitri;  it  is  from  these  heights  that  thou  becomest 
the  saviour  of  our  store  when  we  call  on  thee . . . 


14.  High-raised  protect  us  from  the  evil  by  the  per¬ 
ceiving  mind,  burn  utterly  every  eater  of  our  being;  raise 
us  too  on  high  for  action,  for  life;  distribute  among  the 
gods  our  activity. 

15.  Protect  us,  O  Agni,  from  the  Rakshasa,  protect  us 
from  the  harm  of  the  undelighting,  protect  us  from  him 
who  assails  and  him  who  would  slay  us,  O  Vast  of 
lustre,  O  mighty  and  young. 


a4 


13 


»»ofcn 


iiUii 


ll?JU 


n^iu 


H 


JntJJtia  feifej  (PMhSlh  Shjftft 
I  bP^PK  k  launfr  1/tfiK  lP-*Eh>P>te 


:H2a^  ByUMtfa  h  yitSJE;  P.lH'i^te  £a<fe 

I  ^bteit  biuU'Pj'hfv  h&kb  hihl.te  Mj 


PjlbS  b.S$b 
I  folbS  k|l&£  Pbl>h  iifei  IHnJfe 


Wpfc»Kfr  IPIP  tUjPbjPjlb^  P|bHj  PbIK 

I  kiituti  :ptjh)^fe£  Hskktpe 


pit^foj  b.  :k  ibhj&sUite  ayiiy  :itih  lb 
I  ifeiSitiK:  ^  tfty»Kp»ifta)>r^n>  bjb^bj  fe.bJk 


a'HIi  Oils  AW  3H1  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


16.  As  with  thick  falling  blows  scatter  utterly  (or  scatter 
like  clouds  to  every  side)  all  the  powers  of  undelight,  O 
devourer  of  their  force  (or  destroyer  of  affliction),  and 
him  who  would  do  us  harm;  whatsoever  mortal  being 
exceeds  us  by  the  keenness  of  his  actions,  may  he  not 
as  our  enemy  have  mastery  over  us. 

17.  Agni  has  won  perfected  energy  for  Kanwa  and  has 
won  perfected  enjoyment;  Agni  protects  for  him  all 
friendly  things,  Agni  keeps  ever  in  safe  being  Medhyatithi 
who  has  confirmed  him  by  the  song  of  praise. 


18.  By  Agni  we  call  Turvasha  and  Yadu  from  the 
upper  kingdoms;  Agni  has  led  to  a  new  dwelling  Brihad- 
ratha  and  Turviti  (or  Turviti  of  wide  delight),  a  power 
against  the  foe. 


19.  Man  establisheth  thee  within,  O  Agni,  as  a  light 
for  the  eternal  birth;  mayest  thou  burn  brightly  in  Kanwa 
manifested  in  the  Truth  and  increased  in  being,  thou  to 
whom  the  doers  of  action  bow  down. 


20.  Impetuous,  O  Agni,  and  forceful  are  thy  flames, 
terrible  and  not  to  be  approached;  always  thou  do  burn 
utterly  the  powers  who  detain  and  the  powers  who  art- 
vessels  of  suffering,  yea,  every  devourer. 


15 


91 


nxii  :itobjh  apx  ikb  |pp-pi?h 

I  ujh^ibb  JLi£jLi.  p^irt  JhJp.thJ  :hjia 


d^ii  alia  I  a>  :aus  akiy  :pfrpm;fr^h*ih  *hhe 
I  kit  k  iaus  halt  hijhj  Jhah  ta^J  lfeui  h2ajS 


HkllhkliaS  kit  ia|h  irtPhKJltjfo  ia±h  rhlh^hfe 
I  hk  t»Jja>»)>JtPbk?»  iaa  hk  ik£  Mh& 


mil  :ikkb  lkl  hftht  kikh  :li\h  Ihljah 

i  Wu^b  y±a  bit^b  ^hh  p*p»-  iMt  ka  a  lath 


v»b  <fe& 

:i£Mli  :il iilh 


3HU  OIJLS AIM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


PARASARA  SHAKTYA 
Sukta  65 

1.  He  hides  himself  like  a  thief  with  the  cow  of  vision 
in  the  secret  cavern,  he  takes  to  himself  our  adoration, 
and  thither  he  carries  it.1  The  thinkers  take  a  common 
joy  in  him,  they  follow  him  by  his  footprints;  all  the 
Masters  of  sacrifice  come  to  thee,  O  Flame,  in  the  secrecy. 

2.  The  Gods  follow  after  him  the  law  of  the  workings 
of  Truth.  He  stands  encompassing  all  as  heaven  the 
earth.  The  Waters  make  him  grow  increasing  in  his 
bulk  by  their  toil,2  the  Flame  well-born  in  their  womb,  in 
the  abode  of  the  Truth. 

3.  He  is  as  if  a  delightful  thriving,  he  is  like  the  earth 
our  wide  dwelling-place.  He  is  enjoyable  like  a  hill  and 
bliss-giving  like  fast-running  water.  He  is  like  a  charger 
in  the  battle  rushing  to  the  gallop  and  like  a  flowing 
river,3  who  shall  hedge  in  his  course? 

4.  He  is  the  close  comrade  of  the  Rivers  as  is  a  brother 
of  his  sisters.  He  devours  the  earth’s  forests  as  a  king  his 
enemies.  When  driven  by  the  breath  of  the  wind  he 
ranges  around  the  forests,  the  Flame  tears  asunder  the 
hairs  of  Earth’s  body. 


1  or  better,  he  takes  to  himself  our  surrender,  he  carries  with  him  our 
surrender. 

a  or,  by  their  chant, 

or,  like  a  sea  in  its  motion, 


17 


81 


n fell  hk&  :]a%i  y±ta  k  itci  fob}  k  ipaj 

I  iribifej  XMWb  atolls  U2ikj  kbit 


nhn  ajihb  mx  jays  a  ma  itaiits  feaj  ib.-t.ia  kapt 

i  kikikis  ikp  itobh  k  lbJQ  (boa  k  ipipap  iiMb 


II ^ II  LbLhppyji  :kla  k  itoh  kbjfctiij  lkbinptt  k  lteXP 
I  :kk  b  ibi-p  ynlis  bhiidia  k  pa  LfetoJ  kbp. 

bb  m 


IIV)II  :itUphbj  JJsiitJ  tolkh  tP.IfrKPte  lbp  k  imp 

i  MtbLubfej  Leapt  line  kyp  a  EataajM 


3313  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


5.  He  breathes  in  the  Waters  like  a  seated  swan. 
Waking  in  the  dawn  he  has  power  by  the  will  of  his 
works  to  give  knowledge  to  the  peoples.  He  is  like  the  God 
of  the  Wine,  born  of  the  Truth  and  a  creator.  He  is 
like  a  cow  with  her  new-born.  He  is  wide-spreading  and 
his  light  is  seen  from  afar. 


Sukta  66 

1.  He  is  like  a  wealth  richly  diverse  and  like  the  all- 
seeing  of  the  Sun.  He  is  as  if  life  and  the  breath  of  our 
existence,  he  is  as  if  our  eternal  child.  He  is  like  a  galloper 
bearing  us.  He  clings  to  the  forests:  he  is  like  a  cow 
with  her  milk.  He  is  pure-bright  and  wide  is  his  lustre. 


2.  He  holds  all  our  good  like  a  pleasant  home;  he  is 
!ikc  ripe  corn.  He  is  a  conqueror  of  men  and  like  a 
chanting  Rishi;  there  is  word  of  him  among  the  folk: 
he  is  as  if  our  exultant  steed  of  swiftness;  he  upholds  our 
growth. 


3.  He  is  light  in  a  house  difficult  to  inhabit;1  he  is  as  a 
will  ever  active  in  us;  he  is  like  a  wife  in  our  abode  and 
sufficient  to  every  man.  When  he  blazes  wonderfully 
manifold,  he  is  like  one  white  in  the  peoples:  he  is  like  a 
golden  chariot;  he  is  a  splendour  in  our  battles. 


1  or,  he  is  a  light  difficult  to  kindle; 


19 


ufell  lil  iH&JGj  Ji-b  bhlpfrbj 

I  t»b^k»>j  it&blta*lb^  limb  Jblbi 


ll ^ ll  oibhoS  iPjS^ib^  bk  J£it  b&fe  :Km  b 

i^bu.ibUM>  2ajk  ^nb  JbJttJ  flPHLIb  bbfe 


6\^  £& 


\ 


IIV.U  :fcllt  P*PftlP>lHb  * 

I  U»s  p*h>u  (biu  b  u»itPt»fe  bfe  usJibib  b 


11*11  ^iuibU>Pjh  ibjbife  :HJ£  bibjb  y*b  b^  ^  lhb 
I  ith'PKiabArabj  bfeiiblbi  hLBab  bb^ 


3HIJ  OIXS AH  3  HA  Ol  SNHAH 


Mandala  ONE 


4.  He  is  like  an  army  running  to  the  charge  and  puts 
strength  in  us:  he  is  like  the  flaming  shaft  of  the  Archer 
with  its  keen  burning  front.  A  twin  he  is  born,  a  twin 
he  is  that  which  is  to  be  born :  he  is  the  lover  of  the  vir¬ 
gins  and  the  husband  of  the  mothers. 

j.  We  by  your  movement,  wc  by  your  staying,  come  to 
him  when  his  light  is  kindled  as  the  cows  come  home  to 
their  stall.  He  is  like  a  river  running  in  its  channel  and 
sends  in  his  front  the  descending  Waters:  the  Ray-Cows 
move  to  him  in  the  manifesting1  of  the  world  of  the  Sun. 


Sukta  67 

1.  He  is  the  conqueror  in  the  forests;  in  mortals  he  is 
a  friend:  he  chooses  inspiration  as  a  king  an  unaging 
councillor.  He  is  as  if  our  perfect  welfare;2  he  is  like  a 
happy  will  just  in  its  thinking  and  becomes  to  us  our 
priest  of  the  call  and  the  bearer  of  our  offerings. 

2.  He  holds  in  his  hands  all  mights:  sitting  in  the  secret 
cave  he  upholds3  the  gods  in  his  strength.  Here  men 
who  hold  in  themselves  the  Thought  come  to  know  him 
when  they  have  uttered  the  Mantras  formed  by  the  heart. 


1  or,  when  the  Sun  appears. 

2  or,  a  perfecting  good; 

3  or,  establishes 


21 


zz 


Mill  :fr(tPHl€  UitbH  to3fe  hlh  toJbfr  to£fej  to±J£to 
i  assail*  }tys  t»^tanfcoTt  p^hlf-  fo-.  ijsty  afejite 


Mill  ltoiljb  .ItolE^  (fef>toH  jjh^u^h  ijh 

tficiit  frSjifa*  htoikys 


2Z& 


Moll  :tto  ftlhft  :U}fe  £E=]±  :£lb£toj  ys  jh>PJPJ 

I  rtoifeafijs  to£  JJ£J3  tolbiijl±±bU  &iU2  }to  toj 


lull  himJfefe  £  fe)fcgtojlie  to±b&  IPto*P-fe  to  to} 
l  r^PhlUto  EIPP  :to  Ihtoitoto  lito  P_%toj  I  to 


llfell  :lto  Ito  lilt  pf>hii»ti»j  ijih  j±}  y»th  Pjifrh  ifrKj 
1  :tobi  :jktjtoito  1£  ttitoib  JtotoJh  lltolto  116  to  ysle 


3HIi  OIJ.SAK  3H1  Oi  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


3.  As  the  unborn  he  has  held  the  wide  earth,  he  has 
up-pillared  heaven  with  his  Mantras  of  truth.  Guard  the 
cherished  footprints  of  the  Cow  of  vision ;  O  Fire,  thou 
art  universal  life,  enter  into  the  secrecy1  of  secrecies. 


4.  He  who  has  perceived  him  when  he  is  in  the  secret 
cave,  he  who  has  come  to  the  stream  of  the  Truth,  those 
who  touch  the  things  of  the  Truth  and  kindle  him, — to 
such  a  one  he  gives  word  of  the  Riches. 

5.  He  who  in  the  growths  of  earth  holds  up  his  great¬ 
nesses,  both  the  progeny  born  and  what  is  in  the  mothers, 
he  is  Knowledge  in  the  house  of  the  Waters,  and  life 
universal;  the  thinkers  have  measured  and  constructed 
him  like  a  mansion. 


Sukta  68 

1.  Thej'carrier,  burning,  he  reaches  heaven.  He  un¬ 
ravels  the  nights  and  uncovers  the  stable  and  the  moving; 
for  this  is  the  one  God  who  envelops  with  himself  the 
grandeurs  of  all  the  Gods. 

2.  All  cleave2  to  thy  will  of  works  when,  O  God,  thou 
art  born  a  living  being  from  dry  matter.  All  enjoy  the 
Name,  the  Godhead ;  by  thy  movements  they  touch  Truth 
and  Immortality. 


1  or,  the  secrecy  of  the  secret  Cave. 
3  or,  take  joy  in 


23 


Uhll  jn(>?  liyji  IfhPJ  totl±a  :bMus  feli  b  bl£ 
l  kitLtLhj  India*  ituji  ihfe 


niii  hh  my  ;pit>{>  mk  tjttt  ib^fc  :pit»js  ijh 

I  :iyji2£  Jb  |b*>J  (frlj+P  IKh  :>IU\  t  ItateT^Tfe  :<fcj£ 


'b^  <m 


llV>ll  :iPPEkjP4  jfeUi  JS^bj  :&k£  :il  BJJn^K  fcli  fcj 
I  :m>S  Put  h4k>  h^h^Ki  p^htf'  P»k  :ife£  uShj 


iixii  oiteijysfefei  Pkm  h  Skakty  ini  fea&S 
i  Minij2i  iPh  imfewfrj  b.  tpht.(j±n  yi nbj 


llfell  t»4Pt>  h^UIttltj  £  It  fr+Epfr 

I  :&J&  ajihK  btPjhlPtPJPJ^  t?4P>  ltK  P4P>- 


H4IIJ  OIXS AN  3HX  OX  SNNAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


3.  He  is  the  urgings  of  the  Truth,  the  thinking  of  the 
Truth,  the  universal  life  by  whom  all  do  the  works.  He 
who  gives  to  thee,  he  who  gains1  from  thee,  to  him,  for  thou 
knowest,  give  the  Riches. 

4.  He  is  the  priest  of  the  sacrifice  seated  in  the  son 
of  Man :  he  verily  is  the  lord  of  these  riches.  They  desire 
the  seed  mutually  in  their  bodies;  the  wise  by  their  own 
discernings  come  wholly  to  know. 

5.  Those  who  listen  to  his  teaching,  those  who  are 
swift  to  the  journey,  serve  gladly  his  will  as  sons  the  will 
of  a  father.  He  houses  a  multitude  of  riches  and  flings 
wide  the  doors  of  the  Treasure.  He  is  the  dweller  within 
who  has  formed  heaven  with  its  stars. 


Sukta  69 

1.  Blazing  out  brilliant  as  the  lover  of  the  Dawn, 
filling  the  two  equal  worlds2  like  the  Light  of  Heaven, 
thou  art  born  by  our  will  and  comest  into  being  all 
around  us ;  thou  hast  become  the  father  of  the  Gods,  thou 
who  art  the  Son. 

2.  The  Fire  having  the  knowledge  is  a  creator3  without 
proud  rashness ;  he  is  as  if  the  teat  of  the  Cows  of  Light, 
the  sweetener4  of  the  draughts  of  the  Wine.  He  is  as  one 
blissful  in  a  man,  one  whom  we  must  call  in;  he  is  seated 
rapturous  in  the  middle  of  the  house. 


1  or,  learns  from  thee, 

2  or,  the  two  Companions 

3  or,  ordainer  of  things 

4  or,  taster  of  all  foods 


25 


92 


niii  i±±j£  iaaa  amaat  mb  ajm»>  ae 

i  bfeyi£  :b^K  mam  abb 


o6\  <£& 


l|V)|l  ^fcj  P'bfefenhs  ul  |P-»jp  IP^ 

i  h+fcp^jh'fmma  :^|teihbj  jxa*  a 


iixii  ajiamaj  jaaaaajaaaimiiiaa  ym  ^  aa 
i  baa  mja  :at%*2  jata  mjaaj  am  iah  .?.?»ja 


ufen  ra&mmsbj  mmaatps  lsjaa  :aja  Man  mmj 
i  a^m  aj  y&y  a  mm  ami  jam  jma  a  ja£ 


H'HH  OIXSAPV  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


3.  He  is  born  to  us  as  if  a  son  rapturous  in  our  house; 
like  a  glad  horse  of  swiftness  he  carries  safe  through 
their  battle  the  peoples:  when  I  call  to  the  beings  who 
dwell  in  one  abode  with  the  Gods,1  the  Flame  attains 
all  godheads. 


4.  None  can  impair  the  ways  of  thy  workings  when  for 
these  gods2  thou  hast  created  inspired  knowledge.  This 
is  thy  work  that  yoked  with  the  Gods,  thy  equals,  thou 
hast  smitten,3  that  thou  hast  scattered  the  powers  of  evil. 


5.  Very  bright  and  lustrous  is  he  like  the  lover  of  Dawn. 
May  his  form  be  known  and  may  he  wake  to  knowledge 
for  this  human  being,  may  all  bear  him  in  themselves,  part 
wide  the  Doors  and  move4  into  the  vision  of  the  world  of 
the  Sun. 


Sukta  70 

1 .  May  we  win  the  many  Riches,  may  the  Fire,  flaming 
high  with  his  light,  master  by  the  thinking  mind,  take 
possession  of  all  things  that  are,  he  who  knows  the  laws  of 
the  divine  workings  and  knows  the  birth  of  the  human 
being. 


1  or,  with  men, 

2  or,  these  men 

3  or,  that  thou  hast  slain, 

6  or  ,  come  to  the  seeing  of  the  Sun. 


27 


It^lt  fchtt  :h^h|h  PPifr  ^  JmiikL  xkui 


l|V>M  mXh  frjfrfrj  Pp’lvjlrh^  mx£  :it  lti  tj 
I  rjjttfei  £jfe  %%)  mXh  JELteJ  bbfe  p»|i*k  mu 


HXII  imfc  ttjjhh^ib^jb.>&  :uhbjb»  bji>*> 

I  kP|bKP?tb>bi;glb->  :lh^bj  JMfc  :Jj=£  h^bb 


nfe»  faLSiy  b^Ph  ifeik|  £jih  tj  mk  mb 

»  :Pbft  lie  ^laltlb  llft^b>  ^to  |blhB>  k 


WhU  :^3im  mke  |b^bj  k  liixj  in(>|p>^  i^bbj  j£fc 
I  hlhi>^Kit  rnihi  feikli  IkiHb  Jklt  Ihte  Jit  y*lt 


3>IIJ  DIXSAW  3HX  OX  SMJAIAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


2.  He  is  the  child  of  the  waters,  the  child  of  the  forests, 
the  child  of  things  stable  and  the  child  of  things  that 
move.  Even  in  the  stone  he  is  there  for  man,  he  is  there 
in  the  middle  of  his  house, — he  is  as  one  universal  in 
creatures;  he  is  the  Immortal,  the  perfect  thinker. 

3.  The  Fire  is  a  master  of  the  nights,  he  gives  of  the 
Riches  to  him  who  prepares  for  him  the  sacrifice  with 
the  perfect  words.  O  thou  who  art  conscious,  guard,  as 
the  knower,  these  worlds,  and  the  birth  of  the  Gods,  and 
mortal  men. 

4.  Many  nights  of  different  forms  have  increased 
him,  the  Fire  who  came  forth  from  the  Truth,  who  is  the 
stable  and  the  moving:  the  priest  of  the  call,  he  is  achieved 
for  us,  seated  in  the  sun- world,1  making  true  all  our 
works. 

5.  Thou  establishest  word  of  thee  in  the  Ray-Cow 
and  in  the  forests;  it  is  as  if  all  were  bringing  the  sun- 
world  as  offering.  Men  in  many  parts  serve  thee  and 
gather  in  knowledge  as  from  a  long-lived  father. 


6.  He  is  like  one  efficient  in  works  and  hungry  to 
seize,  heroic  like  one  shooting  arrows,  terrible  like  an 
assailant  charging,  he  is  a  splendour  in  our  battles. 


1  or,  the  sun, 


a5 


29 


||V,||  feih  fajfcpj  haitkij  IX.bk  IPfrEPH 

I  uibMfcjb.fcjh^k-^  %bj  Hi  £  Hhyj2  |h 


Itxll  hibbj  ynibllk  bil  J±iH  1HH  %ti^H  k  Hli 

i  £tt  (*■»*  (Phi?  |k£k  ipj?>jpiH  u±k*y  msyaH 


llfcll  :(P->hhb  IPhK  h-.p^lb^  ifia-h^h  (tth>  (P-.hu  PH? 

I  :li?kfej  jhfrfrJIhPjjH  HiHHkfe  Hkfe£ 


uhll  :mni%  :lte  h^hgiu  (p£fc  (febjfcp 

I  infei  (PMjigfe^  £Jihfe£  k  iiPhJ  l^gl  j=HJ  23(b 


|  -lookup.  :hUk'  h?Pj  t  P-.lte>(Pli;k.h..p]  fc  h£ 


fa  a>& 


33IJ  OIXSAW  3HA  OX  SNIVAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


SUKTA  71 

1 .  The  Mothers  who  dwell  in  one  abode,  desiring  came 
to  him  who  desired  them  and  gave  him  pleasure  as  to 
their  eternal  spouse:  the  sisters  took  joy  in  him  as  the 
Ray-Cows  in  the  Dawn  when  she  comes  dusky,  flushing 
red,  then  shining  out  in  rich  hues. 

2.  Our  fathers  by  their  words  broke  the  strong  and 
stubborn  places,  the  Angiras  seers  shattered  the  mountain 
rock  with  their  cry;  they  made  in  us  a  path  to  the  Great 
Heaven,  they  discovered  the  Day  and  the  sun-world  and 
the  intuitive  ray  and  the  shining  herds. 


3.  They  held  the  Truth,  they  enriched  the  thought 
of  this  human  being ;  then,  indeed,  had  they  mastery  and 
understanding  bearing  wide  the  Flame,  the  powers  at 
work  go  towards  the  gods  making  the  Birth  to  grow 
by  delight. 

4.  When  the  Life-Breath  borne  pervadingly  within  has 
churned  him  out  in  house  and  house  he  becomes  white 
and  a  conqueror.  Then,  indeed,  he  becomes  the  Flaming 
Seer  and  companioning  us  goes  on  an  embassy  as  for  a 
powerful  king. 

5.  When  he  had  made  this  sap  of  essence  for  the  great 
Father  Heaven,  he  came  slipping  downward,  one  close  in 
touch,  having  knowledge.  The  Archer  loosed  violently 
on  him  his  arrow  of  lightning,  but  the  god  set  the  flaming 
energy  in  his  own  daughter. 


31 


no ^ II  lMt  kjlkhj  Ihijtt  k  Jkk 

Ikk  :»J«feo?tj  kJJte  12akjh  JS  kjikshj  ]h?>tt  kite  *k  Lbt 


tl'bll  PbkhKJ  ta^>  {jolhfc  Hni>blkkj  IM1M> 

I  Ji|  b-»b  Ikb  :tfeb>h  rau  k  |bl+ 


tl?ll  b-ah^hbUN  tnifei  Mbb  lafrbkhiS 
l  ktkjkj  km  2klte  k^  kihk  kkjto  JJte 


UG\II  Mb»bjbj  Pjh.K  k££  lkkj  ik  lkk  kikjkj  fcjkjkjll*  k 
I  :^i2  Biii  :kkk  k  £ki  kdkk  :J*b  kjle  IkteJ  kijle 


ll^ll  bjibb  h  fclk  ihisblh  ^>bSj  mk  Jkk  kke  lkk 
I  he  HK  Jkiiliiilk  Ik  Utk  kjlkkj  lie  l±k  k.*S±k  lie  ki 


atfu  ous  ah  a  ha  ox  s.mhah 


/  1 

! 

Vy 

MANDALA  ONE 

6.  He  who  kindles  die  light  for  thee  in  thy  own  home 
and  offers  obeisance  of  surrender  day  by  day  and  thy 
desire  is  towards  him,  mayst  thou  in  thy  twofold  mass, 
increase  his  growth,  he  whom  thou  speedest  in  one  car 
with  thee,  may  he  travel  with  the  riches. 

7.  All  satisfactions  cleave  to  the  Fire  as  the  seven 
mighty  rivers  join  the  ocean.  Our  growth  of  being  has 
not  been  perceived  by  thy  companions,  but  thou  who 
hast  perceived,  impart1  to  the  gods  thy  knowledge. 

8.  When  a  flame  of  energy  came  to  this  King  of  men  for 
impelling  force,  when  in  their  meeting  Heaven  was  cast 
in  him  like  pure  seed,  the  Fire  gave  birth  to  a  might,2 
young  and  faultless  and  perfect  in  thought  and  sped  it 
on  its  way. 

9.  He  who  travels  the  paths  suddenly  like  the  mind,  the 
Sun,  ever  sole  is  the  master  of  the  treasure:  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  the  Kings  with  beautiful  hands,  are  there 
guarding  in  the  Rays3  delight  and  immortality. 

10.  O  Fire,  mayst  thou  not  forget4  ancient  friendships, 
thou  who  art  turned  towards  us  as  the  knower  and  seer. 
As  a  mist  dims  a  form,  age  diminishes  us;  before  that  hurt 
falls  upon  us,®  arrive. 


1  or,  gain  for  us  knowledge  in  the  Gods. 

2  or,  a  host.  It  may  mean  the  army  of  the  life-gods,  Marutdm  sardliah. 

3  gosn,  in  the  Ray-Cows,  the  shining  herds  of  the  Sun 

4  or,  neglect  or  wipe  out 

6  or,  give  heed,  before  that  assault  comes  upon  us. 


33 


||V,n  Mining  1M  PEo#  ! 

|  Uh->kP  |>»kU  |U.b^h  PPJP^\P 


h£  IPIPIIMi 


llxll  WmbhAju  yih  %h  PMuib^jkj  iBfeJHb  lkkibkj 
I  :PlfrPJfr  JJQ£}k  JS  MPIM^P  IPJl  mi  lie 


llfell  :iP!Kh  :]=ik  P'ftfcfttHhftJk  HijikJ  PJIttIP 
I  P)PhP  :fcfejk  kkii  Pj^hJIP^HS  mt  mnj 


iihn  :p>pip  tah  %h  :fe±k±mmy  msm 

I  IPktf  ^fcbj  |U^a.kyfr->bj  fc  tiij  j^h  kiJ2  %fci£ 


II ill  ifeitj  kjxkke  ytJ&fe  m  linya  yihbjsb-fcbyie 

I  [fijaS  yit*.  (PIPiP  ^q^Pbftlfc  iteiife  kj 


7I>II.T  OIXSAIV  3HJ,  OJ.  SHFUR 


MANDALA  ONE 


Sukta  72 

1.  He  forms  within  us  the  seer- wisdoms  of  the  eternal 
Creator  holding  in  his  hand  many1  powers  of  the  god¬ 
heads.  May  Fire  become  the  treasure-master  of  the 
riches,  ever  fashioning2  all  immortal  things. 

2.  All  the  immortals,  the  wise  ones,  desired  but  found 
not  in  us  the  Child  who  is  all  around;  turning  to  toil 
on  his  track,  upholding  the  Thought,  they  stood  in  the 
supreme  plane,  they  reached  the  beauty  of  the  Flame. 

3.  When  for  three  years,  O  Fire,  they  worshipped  thee, 
the  pure  ones  thee  the  pure,  with  the  clarity  of  the  light, 
they  held  too  the  sacrificial  Names,  their  bodies  came  to 
perfect  birth  and  they  sped  them  on  the  way. 

4.  The  masters  of  sacrifice  discovered  and  in  their 
impetuous  might  bore  the  Vast  Earth  and  Heaven,  then 
the  mortal  knew  them  and  by  his  holding  of  the  upper3 
hemisphere  perceived  the  Fire,  standing  in  the  supreme 
plane. 

5.  Utterly  knowing  him  they  with  their  wives  came  and 
knelt  before  him  and  adored  with  obeisance  the  adorable. 
They  made  themselves  empty  and  formed  their  own  bodies 
guarded  in  his  gaze,  friend  in  the  gaze  of  friend. 


1  or,  many  Strengths 

2  or,  fashioning  together  all  immortal  things. 

3  nemi,  the  half,  referring  apparently  to  the  Great  Heaven,  “ brhad 
dyaub ”  the  upper  half  beyond  which  is  the  supreme  plane. 


35 


98 


Ito ^ n  kkUxHtial?  js  :i3ak  k  JkfeiHJ  kyitt  bie 

I  kbtt&E  Hike  yekb  kj  bfej  hjie 


u'bll  :%  ^K?jhPjy>fcfi  lkLk  bib  kj  JkfejL  ;£ysk  lMi± 
l  h£ii>  irit^Pht?  |mpifc>f>$  :bib  pji^h^  iP.tkj  b  lie 


II7II  ay  yisyt  jfe  k  ikb  jiki&S  IkXk  tek  k£kj 

i  puiu'K'  ikPha  jxi  y?i>  kjja  lie  ky  ynik* 


II6MI  yt>»jS  Jkhle  ib£  |s*ppipipp^  ikk'die  iSkjkiie 
I  :ib  |Kt>«bhPi  h»  iP^Piy  pjippp  ktie  |Skj 


ll^ll  i)ih  k=  bik«blbi  ks&h  :ikyea  kkle  k±tSX  Ikk 
l  :mfrPJfr  IP^JkkJIfrh^  yi  yillk  ik  kik  :y 

HHIJ  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNJAIAH 


mandalA  one 

6.  When  the  masters  of  sacrifice  have  found  hidden 
in  thee  the  thrice  seven  secret  planes,  by  them  they  guard 
with  one  mind  of  acceptance  Immortality.  Protect  the 
Herds,  those  that  stand  and  that  which  is  mobile. 


7.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  knower  of  our  knowings, 
ordain  for  the  people  an  unbroken  succession  of  strengths 
that  they  may  live.  The  knower  within  of  the  paths  of 
the  journey  of  the  gods,  thou  hast  become  a  sleepless 
messenger  and  the  carrier  of  the  offerings. 


8.  The  seven  mighty  Rivers  from  Heaven,  deep¬ 
thinking,  knowers  of  the  Truth,  knew  the  doors  of  the 
treasure;  Sarama  discovered  the  mass  of  the  Ray-Cow, 
the  strong  place,  the  wideness,  and  now  by  that  the 
human  creature  enjoys  bliss. 


9.  These  are  they  who  set  their  steps  on  all  things 
that  have  fair  issue,  making  a  path  towards  immortality. 
Earth  stood  wide  in  greatness  by  the  Great  Ones,  the 
Mother  infinite  with  her  sons  came  to  uphold  her. 


10.  When  the  immortals  made  the  two  eyes  of  Heaven, 
they  set  in  him  the  splendour  and  the  beauty.  Then 
there  flow  as  if  rivers  loosed  to  their  course;  downward 
they  ran,  his  ruddy  mares,  and  knew,  O  Fire. 


37 


UV,U  :ikLb£  likte  kite  telh  hkte 

I  :IiLi±k£kJ  (Efefe  ^>h  kjteite  ^klPhh  Hite  ysL  kj 


llxil  |jt>»K>hiia<?tej  ikh±hi}htetei  HJ  k±J2  hjte 

I  Slfek  kkjte]  p i)e&  ite  hi  JAk  Ikl  H 


II ^ II  ^ah  p^pjh  ushkte  li^fe  k  lihhlS  :ih:l£ 
I  i um>  h  [kPjpSj  hjtehh  IMhkikJ  JtebJh  :t  k 


Hill  Hk  ^TihhjPj  *kl£  pyite  kite  kkjhte  |P->ftlrt£ 
I  ifcAfcj  PjiPfrP  HJibk}  >»**  Lhthlbih  IHkjh  :k  k  Iki 


ll ^ ll  p|>ip  kj  jktekj  Jih  kH^  (PlJi^h  hteJP|>U*Hft* 
l  :&U£  k  |h£ajp.t]Pj^if.K?>  :ifejtek  JlikJHy  :k  kkji 

£S\  a^Ef 


3HI.4  OLLSAW  3HA  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


Sukta  73 

1.  He  is  like  an  ancestral  wealth  that  founds  our 
strength,  perfect  in  his  leading  like  the  command1  of 
one  who  knows,  he  is  like  a  guest  lying  happily  well- 
pleased,  he  is  like  a  priest  ol  invocation  and  increases  the 
house  of  his  worshipper. 

2.  He  is  like  the  divine  Sun  true  in  his  thoughts  and 
guards  by  his  will  all  our  strong  places;  he  is  like  a  splen¬ 
dour  manifoldly  expressed,  he  is  like  a  blissful  self  and 
our  support.2 

3.  He  is  like  a  God  upholding  the  world  and  he 
inhabits  earth  like  a  good  and  friendly  king:  he  is  like  a 
company  of  heroes  sitting  in  our  front,  dwelling  in  our 
house;  he  is  as  if  a  blameless  wife  beloved  of  her  lord. 

4.  Such  art  thou,  O  Fire,  to  whom  men  cleave  kindled 
eternal  in  the  house  in  the  abiding  worlds  of  thy  habi¬ 
tation.  They  have  founded  within  upon  thee  a  great  light; 
become  a  universal  life  holder  of  the  riches. 

5.  O  Fire,  may  the  masters  of  wealth  enjoy  thy  satis¬ 
factions,  the  illumined  wise  Ones  givers  of  the  whole  of 
life:  may3  we  conquer  the  plenitude  from  the  foe  in  our 
battles  holding  our  part  in  the  Gods  for  inspired  know¬ 
ledge. 


1  or,  the  teaching 

8  or,  he  is  one  to  be  meditated  on  (upheld  in  thought),  blissful  like  the  self, 
or,  warriors  in  the  battles  may  we  conquer  the  plenitude. 


39 


11°  ill  :jj±ihi  Pbkb^>  Jbfcs  iys^  i±i2  :hi>  ncbifc 

I  £  %bb  kb  pji?^  jjafe  PjihPP'  tile  ^  ibii 


ll^ll  :i&te  Jb  lh^JPte  :bxfi  jy  mix  t-^ubjPhj  :mpnt| 

I  :i£^  HtlhPb..|>Jb> ^b.»P> HJU  ^PbR-  PtV.'g-jbkN 


ll?ll  kttljb±te  jbbjx  blfeKjhibSbPj  bkt  btbj  bhi<s 
l  Jfe  bb  iblb.fth  hib^  ^  ^le  i>»hfi^pt»  hir-.it? 


II6MI  :h  b  b  InXbjfiP  b  lno$  {y&bj  IPhfribb.  b  IPbP 
I  :bmftjh  Jbte  hJ>J  iiniktbkj  PjK&  bite 


ll^ll  ksjlteb  Ibbb  :bb±iy  b}  UnlbtektJ  P|hS  :Pbi>h 
I  :lbbbl£  bibh^h  :\ba$b>  :lPII<;blb  {bPb  b^PTb 

a^IIJ  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


6.  The  milch-cows  of  the  Truth,  enjoyed1  in  heaven, 
full-uddered,  desiring  us,  have  fed  us  with  their  milk: 
praying  for  right-thinking  from  the  Beyond  the  Rivers 
flowed  wide  over  the  Mountain. 

7.  O  Fire,  in  thee  praying  for  right-thinking,  the 
masters  of  sacrifice  set  inspired  knowledge  in  heaven: 
they  made  night  and  dawn  of  different  forms  and  joined 
together  the  black  and  the  rosy  hue. 


8.  The  mortals  whom  thou  speedest  to  the  Treasure, 
may  we  be  of  them,  the  lords  of  riches  and  we.  Filling 
earth  and  heaven  and  mid-air  thou  clingest  to  the  whole 
world  like  a  shadow. 

9.  O  Fire,  safeguarded2  by  thee  may  we  conquer  the 
war-horses  by  our  war-horses,  the  strong  men  by  our 
strong  men,  the  heroes  by  our  heroes;  may  our  illumined 
wise  ones  become  masters  of  the  treasure  gained  by  the 
fathers,  and  possess  them  living  a  hundred  winters. 


10.  O  ordainer  of  things,  O  Fire,  may  these  utterances 
be  acceptable  to  thee,  to  the  mind  and  to  the  heart;  may 
we  have  strength  to  control  with  firm  yoke  thy  riches, 
holding  in  thee  the  inspired  knowledge  enjoyed3  by  the 
gods. 


1  or,  shared  by  heaven, 

2  or,  upheld 

3  or,  distributed  by  the  gods. 


41 


Ilfcll  ^blP  l$Plb-»b  PblU  ^Pb  jli>lh£hwUj 
I  kii^pz  fekgfcte  ^PPP  IpHSPJ  22Ife 
I  :lk£g  kfe>,h  :it&2  kjkfc  lki£lji 
ikitbafej  ikk^kkj  sk£  ij  b 


Hill  :l£fej  bPfr  S--PIK  :ltbj  IPPjb  If, lab  l&tfeabjllfc 
I  klkjjnjaP  Hkjk  Uc  bPjPiP^>jh 

I  :kjitik  aJfi  :kjfckj  -kjkik  HbJ  ip>i>j'gp<*>bx' 

Jtt%i  IPIHP'I?  y^JI? 


Hill  :kbjk  Itekll&SS  ikkjy£  23jk  kt2ajmkj 

I  ih*  lh=ME>^  lb*>  (>bab^  Ihbatg 

1  pp^m*  a  jskj  pe^pii*  (p$p  Lb  hh 
p^b->lt»  kdk  ~>IP\p  p>|tp 


6\i  <  !fcB 


a^Id  OIXSAJAI  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


DAIVODASI  PARUCCHEPA 
Sukta  127 

1.  I  meditate  on  the  Fire,  the  priest  of  the  call,  the 
giver  of  the  Treasure,  the  son  of  force,  who  knows  all 
things  born,  the  Fire  who  is  like  one  illumined  and  know¬ 
ing  all  things  born. 

The  Fire  who  perfect  in  the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  a  God 
with  his  high-lifted  longing1  hungers  with  his  flame  for 
the  blaze  of  the  offering  of  light,  for  its  current  poured 
on  him  as  an  oblation. 

2.  Thee  most  powerful  for  sacrifice,  as  givers  of  sacri¬ 
fice  may  we  call,  the  eldest  of  the  Angiras,  the  Illumined 
One,  call  thee  with  our  thoughts,  O  Brilliant  Fire,  with 
our  illumined  thoughts,  men’s  priest  of  the  call,2  who  encir¬ 
cles  all  like  heaven,  the  Male  with  hair  of  flaming-light 
whom  may  these  peoples  cherish  for  his  urge. 

3.  Many  things  illumining  with  his  wide-shining  energy 
he  becomes  one  who  cleaves  through  those  who  would 
hurt  us,  like  a  battle-axe  he  cleaves  through  those  who 
would  hurt  us,  he  in  whose  shock  even  that  which  is  strong 
falls  asunder,  even  what  is  firmly  fixed  falls  like  trees; 
overwhelming  with  his  force  he  toils  on  and  goes  not  back, 
like  warriors  with  the  bow  from  the  battle  he  goes  not 
back. 


1  or,  high  uplifted  lustre  seeking  for  the  Gods 

2  or,  the  priest  of  the  call  for  men  who  see 


43 


Il^ll  kibib  k  idk  lbdb  mbUil 

M\k4  biS 

I  »»$>£>*  b->bh  -frpnHh^.LlS 
I  :kJ?ab^jlkP)>kJ?ab^l>bfa\P^k-i>. 

-ItjtabjB  kMH  k  yslS  Ij  li  ' 


llVtll  MVU-H>  ^bo  lbk>K>  1>1M»  |Wbb->  IbkPbkkPbk. 

I  b  blS  22^b  fcbif»kr»b>k>siB> 

l  m>pib?>j  hkiKfr  -HIM)  \>py»6  :h  kkk 
Sjk^h  ^l^hkUih  h^>kP 


ilxil  kji>b4j  bj  ikti'^iin>j  bj  ife»kj  iibiy 

l  bbSteb  ^kb  lfljitE  :b  is 

|  ^bfcPalb  bk>s  Ubh.yalSkjlrijVVkjlCakj^ 

£fej  Lbbl  bis  lit-ife&j  iksl 


33IJ  OIXSAPV  3HX  OX  SMJAIAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


4.  Even  things  strongly  built  they  give  to  him  as  to  one 
who  knows :  one  gives  for  safeguarding  by  his  movements 
of  flaming-power,  gives  to  the  Fire  that  he  may  guard  us. 
Into  many  things  he  enters  and  hews  them  with  his 
flaming  light  like  trees,  even  things  firmly  fixed  he  tears 
by  his  energy  and  makes  his  food  by  his  energy  even  things 
firmly  fixed. 


5.  We  meditate  on1  that  fullness  of  him  on  the  upper 
levels,  this  Fire  the  vision  of  whom  is  brighter  in  the  night 
than  in  the  day,  for  his  undeparting  life  brighter  than  in 
the  day.  Then  does  his  life  grasp  and  support  us  like  a 
strong  house  of  refuge  for  the  Son, — ageless  fires  moving 
towards  the  happiness  enjoyed  and  that  not  yet  enjoyed, 
moving  his  ageless  fires. 


6.  He  is  many-noised  like  the  army  of  the  storm-winds2 
hurrying  over  the  fertile  lands  full  of  our  labour,  hurrying 
over  the  waste  lands.  He  takes  and  devours  the  offerings, 
he  is  the  eye  of  intuition  of  the  sacrifice  in  its  due 
action;  so  all  men  follow  with  pleasure  the  path  of 
this  joyful  and  joy-giving  Fire,  as  on  a  path  leading  to 
happiness. 


1  or,  we  hold 

2  or,  in  the  esoteric  sense,  the  army  of  the  Life-Powers  moving  with  ferti¬ 
lising  rain  over  our  tilled  and  our  waste  lands. 


a6 


45 


9* 


llofcu  Wnnta-te  lollops  UnM3fc  Mite 

I  %J4te  Site  ftifctfcj  KU±atej£  ISM  teps 

I  tatfrh 

ite^M  |l±  ^  M 


Hill  >telM  ikikmk  VP'fP^P.  ipj  ^  liti  MK 
I  :hh  MM  J±M±tetpk  4Si±  ^  paMthajSs 
|  hPIPb^;  Mtzji  l?PI Phji  ^hite  iatMiuJte 

:MM^M  imIm  KMUM 


II ?ll  :MM  l»M^  lte>£  pt£  IK  MlMteK  PCPJ  te  p±K 
I  ihPi^t?  P&hj  UniMMlM  KjJtyK 
|  Kit  P^bl>j^P  Kit  MibiM  MHlM  lt^MM 
Mp>  USMj  MM  1M1MMJ 


I  6MI  :lh)p  2a\Mi^M  IK  ifcjp  PpfcfcjfeJjaigK  Ulip 
|  HlhM.jh  piKjli  ibfefe  jfe(>PjK 
I  :kltit  ItelM  (P*P?.H  Jteliit  P-P|Ph£  MMMitM 
JteteitJK  (PI  P^b  ikb  1M% 


3313  0I1SAIAI  3HA  OX  SNIVAH 


MANDAT. A  ONE 


7.  When  in  his  twofold  strength,  bards  with  illumina¬ 
tion  upon  them,  the  Bhrigu-flame-seers  have  made  obei¬ 
sance  and  spoken  to  him  the  word,  when  they  have 
churned  him  out  by  their  worship, — the  Flame-Seers, 
the  Fire  becomes  master  of  the  riches,  he  who  in  his  purity 
holds  them  within  him,  wise  he  enjoys  the  things  laid 
upon  him  and  they  are  pleasant  to  him,  he  takes  joy  of 
them  in  his  wisdom. 


8.  We  call  to  thee,  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,  the  master 
of  the  house  common  to  them  all  for  the  enjoying,  the 
carrier  of  the  true  words  for  the  enjoying, — to  the  Guest 
of  men  in  whose  presence  stand  as  in  the  presence  of  a 
father,  all  these  Immortals  and  make  our  offerings  their 
food — in  the  Gods  they  become  their  food. 


9.  O  Fire,  thou  art  overwhelming  in  thy  strength, 
thou  art  born  most  forceful  for  the  forming  of  the  Gods,  as 
if  a  wealth  for  the  forming  of  the  Gods;  most  forceful  is 
thy  rapture,  most  luminous  thy  will.  So  they  serve  thee, 
O  Ageless  Fire,  who  hear  thy  word  serve  thee,  O  Ageless 
Fire! 


10.  To  the  Great  One,  the  Strong  in  his  force,  the 
waker  in  the  Dawn,  to  Fire  as  to  one  who  has  vision,  let 
your  hymn  arise.  When  the  giver  of  the  offering  cries 
towards  him  in  all  the  planes,  in  the  front  of  the  wise  he 
chants  our  adoration,  the  priest  of  the  call  of  the  wise 
who  chants  their  adoration. 


47 


IlfeU  :kHfe  2ah  fetala  lfcife  UiiMiiiie 

I  :k£  y±Jaife  feilk  phx'hK.^kj  ih'frPj  kjie 


lUuhb^ytb  b>(p^hx'  ^jP?  ubthiit  mmb  feb^fe 

i  wu>hujy7  mt  is  tehJBJlh  yMi  himkhKJ 

o&i  m 

:teJ24it  miua£ 


li^n  mbii;  ji  jTy>fr>'i>hfat  ifr-tPij^ 

I  yiK  £K  Kfeii  kpktk  ?ai?J]£ 

I  luS^fc  :Mi  :IPPP  v 

■mt  lie  sa^k  Ik  it 


3313  Oils  AW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


11.  So,  becoming  visible,  most  near  to  us  bring,  O  Fire, 
by  thy  perfect  consciousness,  the  Riches  that  ever  accom¬ 
pany  the  Gods,  by  thy  perfect  consciousness  the  Great 
Riches.  O  most  strong  Fire,  create  for  us  that  which  is 
great  for  vision,  for  the  enjoying;  for  those  who  hymn 
thee,  O  Lord  of  plenty,  churn  out  a  great  hero-strength 
as  one  puissant  by  his  force. 


DIRGHATAMAS  AUCHATHYA 
SUKTA  140 

1 .  Offer  like  a  secure  seat  that  womb  to  Agni  the  utterly 
bright  who  sits  upon  the  altar  and  his  abode  is  bliss; 
clothe  with  thought  as  with  a  robe  the  slayer  of  the  dark¬ 
ness  who  is  pure  and  charioted  in  light  and  pure  bright1 
of  hue. 


2.  The  twice-born  Agni  moves  (intense)  about  his 
triple  food;  it  is  eaten  and  with  the  year  it  has  grown 
again ;  with  the  tongue  and  mouth  of  the  one2  he  is  the 
strong  master  and  enjoyer,  with  the  other  he  engirdles 
and  crushes  in  his  embrace3  his  delightful  things. 


1  or,  white;  sukra,  a  white  brightness, 

a  or,  with  his  tongue  in  the  presence  of  the  one 

a  mrs  is  used  of  the  sexual  contact;  varanah  from  v?  to  cover,  surround. 


49 


09 


llV)||  hfrUM  kHJs£KJ£i£tt]±  ItJUS  ^ 

I  -ufatjo.  :hh  kp±  ^hBtea  ^  M£1K 


llx'l  :felSlie  h£  lutovui jihafcl  4ftl>frjle  HiHlile 

I  :hk  !£  mmmi>q&  ^Hh  ^itit 


|| ^ ||  :fchj  ph>  hh$  ha-ltt  IhHhfeSlj*  JidbUski  PfrJIft-lK 
I  Ul'feitj  uuih  iyK  w>>p  j±t£  lElSJli  t&H  l£fej%  (PKIna^ 


a'HW  OJXSAW  3H1  OJ.  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 


3.  He  gives  energy  of  movement  to  both  his  mothers  on 
their  dark  path,  in  their  common  dwelling  and  both  make 
their  way  through  to  their  child1  for  his  tongue  is  lifted 
upward,  he  destroys  and  rushes  swiftly  through  and 
should  be  chosen,  increasing  his  father.2 


4.  For  the  thinker  becoming  man  his  swift  hastening 
impulsions  dark  and  bright  desire  freedom;  active,  rapid, 
quivering,  they  are  yoked  to  their  works,  swift  steeds  and 
driven  forward  by  the  Breath  of  things. 


5.  They  for  him  destroy  and  speed  lightly  on3  creating 
his  dark  being  of  thickness  and  his  mighty  form  of  light; 
when  reaching  forward  he  touches  the  Vast  of  Being, 
he  pants  towards  it  and,  thundering,  cries  aloud.4 


1  or,  following  their  child 

2  Expl.  Heaven  and  Earth,  Mind  and  body  dwelling  together  in  one 
frame  or  in  one  material  world  move  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  they 
pass  through  it  by  following  the  divine  Force  which  is  born  to  their 
activities.  Kupaya  is  of  doubtful  significance.  The  father  is  the  Purusha 
or  else  Heaven  in  the  sense  of  the  higher  spiritual  being. 

3  or,  speed  and  pervade 

1  mahimavanim  might  mean  the  vast  earth,  but  avanx  and  even  prthivi 
are  not  used  in  the  Veda  invariably,  the  former  not  usually,  to  mean 
earth,  but  stray  or  return  to  their  original  sense — sapta  avanayah. 


51 


u\>it  pe-p  phi  psiep  n2h  iifeja  yrn 

I  :M£  p  PJpHjfeiB  :HJtfejE  &lit  ijh  pbpie 


ii?ii  hPRhfrp^fr^  ih  fofrub  pp^Itb  ms  pm 

I  :j±£  ^hiK  :pi4hb->p^b^  %  J±  :piy^  :feMtb 


IICMI  JLfeJi  p?.n&  :phj  :hb  pp  hp  phbb£ 

i  ps  lie  mpyrnm  imbue  bpiitlt  r  :>.?ijej  ppp  r 


ll^ll  :jajLI  Mfe>pi>  iltsli  t  pp  pt.±ii 

I  Pb»p  pplpih  bbk  pi  iukkb  tejsp  b  kbit. 


ania  oixsaiai  hhx  ox  sni\ah 


MANDALA  ONE 


6.  He  who  when  he  would  become  in  the  tawny  ones, 
bends  down  and  goes  to  them  bellowing  as  the  male  to 
its  mates,  putting  out  his  forces  he  gives  joy  to  their 
bodies  and  like  a  fierce  beast  hard  to  seize  he  tosses  his 
horns1 2. 


7.  He  whether  contracted  in  being  or  wide-extended 
seizes  on  them  utterly;  he  knowing,  they  knowing  the 
eternal  Agni  enjoys3  them,  then  again  they  increase 
and  go  to  the  state  divine;  uniting,  another  form  they 
make  for  the  Father  and  Mother. 


8.  Bright  with  their  flowing  tresses  they  take  utter 
delight  of  him,  they  who  were  about  to  perish,  stand 
upon  high  once  more  for  his  coming;4  for  he  loosens 
from  them  their  decay  and  goes  to  them  shouting  high, 
he  creates  supreme  force  and  unconquerable  life. 


9.  Tearing  about  her  the  robe  that  conceals  the  other 
he  moves  on  utterly  to  the  Delight  with  the  creatures  of 
pure  Being  who  manifest  the  Force;  he  establishes  the 
wideness,  he  breaks  through  to  the  goal  for  this  traveller, 
even  though  swift  rushing,  he  cleaves  always  to  the  paths.5 


1  or,  he  makes  blissful  the  forms  of  tiling 

2  babhrusu  the  cows,  amrtqyali  of  a  later  verse— knowledge  in  the 
mortal  mind. 

3  or,  lies  with 

4 mamrusih  is  uncertain.  It  may  be  dead  or  dying,  rebhire  r=  delight,  is 
here  perfectly  proved. 

5  rihan}  rerihat  are  uncertain. 


53 


1^11  yiib  b2b 

I  :it>Ub»  feSfebiHJ  mmiME  ^Bl££bjfefe£  liliS  *b  \WS 


nun  fe  lb  *«*■►»■*  1*  teSibla  ****** 

I  u.^u  )u>9h  biMt  Jb  Phblfe  blbl 


Uiill  kbi  Uthil  bAhilt^  fejli  sfelk  ^  kb 

1  ^  fc»te  Jbb  ;uh->H*Ej  ?lt?KJ  fejMPfrjl  bbjB  bibi£ 


Ilo ill  :kmU£iyh  Bib  bb.^£^iihlkl£J  IbilbK 
clBhi  (Kfe'p  btlb^b  Bibbb  Hh^lh&g 


ayii  OIXSAIM  3HJ  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  ONE 

10.  Bum  bright  for  us,  O  Agni,  in  our  fullnesses,  hence¬ 
forth  be  the  strong  master  and  inhabit  in  us  with  the 
sisters;  casting  away  from  thee  those  of  them  that  are 
infant  minds  thou  shouldst  burn  bright  encompassing  us 
all  about  like  a  cuirass  in  our  battles.1 


11.  This,  O  Agni,  is  that  which  is  well-established  upon 
the  ill-placed ;  even  out  of  this  blissful  mentality  may  there 
be  born  to  thee  that  greater  bliss.  By  that  which  shines 
bright  and  pure  from  thy  body,  thou  winnest  for  us  the 
delight. 


12.  Thou  givest  us,  O  Agni,  for  chariot  and  for  home 
a  ship  travelling  with  eternal  progress  of  motion  that 
shall  carry  our  strong  spirits  and  our  spirits  of  fullness 
across  the  births  and  across  the  peace. 


13.  Mayest  thou,  O  Agni,  about  our  Word  for  thy 
pivot  bring  to  light  for  us  Heaven  and  Earth  and  the  rivers 
that  are  self-revealed ;  may  the  Red  Ones  reach  to  know¬ 
ledge  and  strength  and  long  days  of  light,  may  they 
choose  the  force  and  the  supreme  good. 


1  svasi  is  the  Greek  Kasis  and  an  old  variant  of  has?  wile  or  sister. 
Therefore  it  is  coupled  with  off  a  like  patni. 


55 


MANDALA  TWO 


Ilfell  Jikk  :khiy  ki  kkjkjk  ir£k  & 

I  ^iln>i>lmfrj  fei  kJKIkft];:kkk  J£±£  kikki 


Hill  %fe  y±  b-tP]h^l>  ttJIE-  likk  HJI?l>t^hk>  k£il£K  kk 
I  •uw)u>fcM>jKi^  2ab  kk  kk  k^  kiikk 


Hill  :jylk  t>nik  ^hk  lkk 

I  ijK^uufck^n.>5-Kb^ii>jH)TwiH^Kjfe 


* 

tkLtii±  £hB*h 


GRITSAMADA  BHARGAYA 


SUKTA  1 

1.  O  Fire,  thou  art  born  with  thy  lights,  flaming  out 
on  us  in  thy  effulgence;  thou  art  born  from  the  waters 
and  around  the  stone,  thou  art  born  from  the  forests 
and  born  from  the  plants  of  the  earth.  Pure  art  thou 
in  thy  birth,  O  Master  of  man  and  his  race. 

2.  O  Fire,  thine  are  the  call  and  the  offering,  thine 
the  purification  and  the  order  of  the  sacrifice,  thine 
the  lustration;  thou  art  the  fire-bringer  for  the  seeker  of 
the  Truth.  The  annunciation  is  thine,  thou  becomest  the 
pilgrim-rite:1  thou  art  the  priest  of  the  Word  and  the 
master  of  the  house  in  our  home. 

3.  O  Fire,  thou  art  Indra  the  Bull  of  all  that  are  and 
thou  art  wide-moving2  Vishnu,  one  to  be  worshipped  with 
obeisance.  O  Master  of  the  Word,  thou  art  Brahma,  the 
finder  of  the  Riches:  O  Fire,  who  sustainest  each  and  all, 
closely  thou  companionest  the  Goddess  of  the  many 
thoughts.3 


1  or,  thou  art  the  priest  of  the  pilgrim-rite : 

2  or,  wide-sung 

3  or,  the  Goddess  tenant  of  the  city. 


59 


09 


l  ?ll  ajis  life  iai£  jltPh  PJIfeSEJ  hi 

I  pu^h»k^jfi  pi>m>  ite&isfrj  tyhifej  lie  hh  kihlhi 


I1CMI  kfrEJ^h  ^kh  ^  My|  hlh  Hhfc  IMH  ^ 

i  ajie  mail  latga  hi  pJ>ie  lsyujejs  aaiia 


ll^ll  Ihhl  As  ajlh  :ahaj  ia£  pj^ij,i>>Pib  ia 

I  K>h  p»lh  |Klt  b^bfrj  |$k  j>fctg  P>hfcP 


tlV)ll  :&fe2t|  l^ie  mis  IXb.  hi  ft=>W  h>j>.  Ih^Aikfej 

I  t+SPlUvP  :$>+khj  ^b!P>  bP  h|bf>  ^bb)  ItbfcP  P>bSP 


11*11  :kelit  hh  teaaj  U£J±la  aka  irthPJiaa  lhj?hfr> 

i  :ak|  hih  ajaa.  jaaj  paaaaR  un&a  iaix  p>atp 


’J1I1J  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


4.  O  Fire,  thou  art  Varuna  the  king  who  holds  in  his 
hands  the  law  of  all  workings  and  thou  art  Mitra  the 
potent  and  desirable  Godhead.  Thou  art  Aryaman, 
master  of  beings,  with  whom  is  complete  enjoying;  O 
Godhead,  thou  art  Ansha  who  gives  us  our  portion  in  the 
winning  of  the  knowledge. 

5.  O  Fire,  thou  art  Twashtri  and  fashionest  fullness 
of  force  for  thy  worshipper;  thine,  O  friendly  Light,  are 
the  goddess-Energies  and  all  oneness  of  natural  kind. 
Thou  art  the  swift  galloper  and  lavishest  good  power  of 
the  Horse;  thou  art  the  host  of  the  gods  and  great  is  the 
multitude  of  thy  riches. 

6.  O  Fire,  thou  art  Rudra,  the  mighty  one  of  the 
great  Heaven  and  thou  art  the  army  of  the  Life-Gods 
and  hast  power  over  all  that  fills  desire.  Thou  journeyest 
with  dawn-red  winds  to  bear  thee  and  thine  is  the  house 
of  bliss;  thou  art  Pushan  and  thou  guardest  with  thyself 
thy  worshippers. 

7.  O  Fire,  to  one  who  makes  ready  and  sufficient 
his  works  thou  art  the  giver  of  the  treasure;  thou  art 
divine  Savitri  and  a  founder  of  the  ecstasy.  O  Master  of 
man,  thou  art  Bhaga  and  hast  power  for  the  riches;  thou 
art  the  guardian  in  the  house  for  one  who  worships  thee 
with  his  works. 

8.  O  Fire,  men  turn  to  thee  the  master  of  the  human 
being  in  his  house;  thee  they  crown,  the  king  perfect  in 
knowledge.  O  strong  force  of  Fire,  thou  masterest  all 
things;  thou  movest  to  the  thousands  and  the  hundreds 
and  the  tens. 


a7 


61 


ll£ill  UE£  Xit&jH  Jamils  ^-ifaPJi>  Uii 

i  ^  ilhy  mi  itius  mj^yue  ^Hi»> 


MUM  :fr.h->PJ?i;Pj  l^PpfrJi.  £2  PjfeSb  ^if.>u>K  :>Mt»  fei 
I  :M%J  lyftft  lie  IdM  |Ubi  bP->bb  hu^  hh6  P>Mb-> 


HUM  IPP*>M  i^fep  fei  iittt  PJlkSjPlfc  leopjbi 

I  lllij  JiteP  JPiUt  uy|  &  hfelfr  feftPjyie  kihh> 


Mo JM  :PJPtkl*b  Pj^KHfcjbj  fei  Pbifr  l&Ji  ]±h£lh  £J  J2i 

I  illy!  ^  teM&IP  featekfa  %lih2fe  M>hb! 


M^M  ihb.lbrlh  :blfrp  ibih  fei  PfrbJ^b  PJbP  |bR  £0 
|  HP^PP  JLtbtiS  m^llt  lfej£fe Pkj?iJhJ> PhJ  Pthlbi 


anii  OIXSAW  HHX  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


9.  O  Fire,  men  worship  thee  with  their  sacrifices  as  a 
father  and  thee  that  thou  mayst  be  their  brother  by  their 
achievement  of  works  when  thou  illuminest  the  body 
with  thy  light.  Thou  becomest  a  son  to  the  man  who  wor¬ 
ships  thee;  thou  art  his  blissful  friend  and  guardest  him 
from  the  violence  of  the  adversary. 

10.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  craftsman  Ribhu,  near  to  us 
and  to  be  worshipped  with  obeisance  of  surrender;  thou 
hast  mastery  over  the  store  of  the  plenitude  and  the  riches. 
All  thy  wide  shining  of  light  and  onward  burning  is  for 
the  gift  of  the  treasure;  thou  art  our  instructor  in  wisdom 
and  our  builder  of  sacrifice. 

11.  O  Divine  Fire,  thou  art  Aditi,  the  indivisible 
Mother  to  the  giver  of  the  sacrifice;  thou  art  Bharati,  voice 
of  the  offering,  and  thou  growest  by  the  word.  Thou 
art  II a  of  the  hundred  winters  wise  to  discern;  O  Master 
of  the  Treasure,  thou  art  Saraswati  who  slays  the  python 
adversary. 

12.  O  Fire,  when  thou  art  well  borne  by  us  thou 
becomest  the  supreme  growth  and  expansion  of  our 
being,  all  glory  and  beauty  are  in  thy  desirable  hue  and 
thy  perfect  vision.  O  Vastness,  thou  art  the  plenitude 
that  carries  us  to  the  end  of  our  way;  thou  art  a  multitude 
of  riches  spread  out  on  every  side. 

13.  O  Fire,  the  sons  of  the  indivisible  Mother  made  thee 
their  mouth,  the  pure  Gods  made  thee  their  tongue;  O 
Seer,  they  who  are  ever  close  to  our  giving  are  constant 
to  thee  in  the  rites  of  the  Path;  the  Gods  eat  in  thee  the 
offering  cast  before  them. 


63 


lUll  hhhh  lll^B  KE  >if^  kltfsS  felfckjk 

I  mj  IPP  lhbj$  p>jkPt>^PIU'  Ptafc  PPh 


fc  <£& 


Hi*  II  :m^£  kay  Jbt^Jfe  IBfe  lie  itlfe  UJk  Bj.B  kMk  JaalMte 


nV,ill  k£  ^bjhlkUS  k?teh  »  kj  U±Bjh  feib  Jttii 

I  h%  h  K  PtuvS  biiLkitih  kjl£  %K  h  HlilH  hi 


11**11  :fejlk  Jkli  hi  kjSlle  j^hhi  :kjkh  Ikki 

i  hP§ih^»>Pj^  ihh  Mi  Bile  jklkkie  %£iy  kite  hi 


33IJ  OIASAW  3HA  OX  SNHAH 


MAN  DAL  A  TWO 


14.  O  Fire,  all  the  Gods,  the  Immortals  unhurtful  to 
man,  eat  in  thee  and  by  thy  mouth  the  offering  cast 
before  them;  by  thee  mortal  men  taste  of  the  libation. 
Pure  art  thou  born,  a  child  of  the  growths  of  the  earth. 


15.  O  Fire  that  hast  come  to  perfect  birth,  thou  art  with 
the  Gods  and  thou  frontest  them  in  thy  might  and  thou 
exccedest  them  too,  O  God,  when  here  the  satisfying 
fullness  of  thee  becomes  all-pervading  in  its  greatness 
along  both  the  continents,  Earth  and  Heaven. 


16.  When  to  those  who  chant  thee,  the  luminous  Wise 
Ones  set  free  thy  gift,  O  Fire,  the  wealth  in  whose  front 
the  Ray-Cow  walks  and  its  form  is  the  Horse,  thou 
lcadest  us  on  and  leadest  them  to  a  world  of  greater 
riches.  Strong  with  the  strength  of  the  heroes,  may  we 
voice  the  Vast  in  the  coming  of  knowledge. 


Sukta  2 

1.  Make  the  Fire  that  knows  all  things  born  to  grow 
by  your  sacrifice;  worship  him  with  thy  offering  and  thy 
body  and  thy  speech.  Worship  in  his  kindling  Fire 
with  whom  are  his  strong  delights,  the  male  of  the  sun- 
world,  the  Priest  of  the  Gall,  the  inhabitant  of  Heaven1 
who  sits  at  the  chariot  yoke  in  our  battles. 


1  or,  who  dwells  in  the  Light 


65 


99 


Ipli  ppp  ppp  Jjte£  pie  p&p  tatjfejS  £ain^:b  lie 
I  Spjp  Sip^pnp  ftPiP.t  p  b 


ipu  tie  tys  ktkus  SabiHfefe  pispj^j 

I  m>j  {p-c'te  hppp$  l±P  i&sblfc  ph  feifej  b 


HXU  kte  p£  ppfr  isih  is  plh  :KpSHP-‘t?Pfej  pib  :U2±5h 
I  :fc£  U£  111*  te&£  bpp-»P  Ip  lie  fei  bjtel  lnJitKitP 


ilfcll  hPjiej  i*  ipj  Ps|hhPJjl&felk  ££  bltpi 

l  >>jh>  ppsfi  :lil£si  kali  )b£  P 


(p||  :P»P  >ibfr£  Hjik  piS  Ibis  ibbpPpi^  bSJ 

I  sbUK  b>Pb->  id  psppifefe  pbbpbb  lbi  bjle 


a'HIJ  DIASAK  3HJ.  OJ.  SNI\AH 


MANDALA  TWO 


2.  The  Nights  and  the  Dawns  have  lowed  to  thee 
as  the  milch-cows  low  towards  a  calf  in  their  lairs  of 
rest.  O  Fire  of  many  blessings,  thou  art  the  traveller 
of  Heaven  through  the  ages  of  man  and  thou  shinest 
self-gathered  through  his  nights.1 

3.  The  Gods  have  sent  into  the  foundation  of  the 
middle  world  this  great  worker  and  pilgrim  of  earth 
and  of  heaven,  whom  we  must  know,  like  our  chariot  of 
white-flaming  light,  Fire  whom  we  must  voice  with  our 
lauds  like  a  friend  in  the  peoples. 

4.  They  have  set  in  the  crookedness,  set  pouring  his 
rain  like  gold  in  the  beauty  of  his  light,2  in  the  middle 
world  and  in  his  own  home,  the  guardian  of  the  dappled 
mother  who  awakens  us  to  knowledge  with  his  eyes  of 
vision,  the  protector  of  our  path  along  either  birth. 

5.  Let  Fire  be  the  priest  of  your  call,  let  his  presence  be 
around  every  pilgrim-rite;  this  is  he  whom  men  crown 
with  the  word  and  the  offering.  He  shall  play  in  his 
growing  fires  wearing  his  tiara  of  golden  light;  like 
heaven  with  its  stars  he  shall  give  us  knowledge  of  our 
steps  along  both  the  continent-worlds. 

6.  O  Fire,  opulently  kindling  for  our  peace,  let  thy  light 
arise  in  us  and  bring  its  gift  of  riches.  Make  Earth  and 
Heaven  ways  for  our  happy  journeying  and  the  offerings 
of  man  a  means  for  the  coming  of  the  Gods. 


1  or,  self-gathered  thou  illuininest  his  nights. 

2  or,  like  a  thing  of  delight  in  his  shining  beauty, 


67 


89 


llUlt  %i  Blbbjlb  i2ibj  ^bbjlb  hbjtthhPb  P>hb 
I  :bh&  p->hh^  lbib&bhijb  miiSK  t#i*  bjjb  lb  b 


110  i  n  h>.?a£  bJbMi  iabi  lbsbbaj£  bbh  bJbbiE  sfelhib 
I  bjie  Jbb  Lhbbbj  lb  llalSb  b\b£  lb  lbbte  P>bfrfc 


tl^n  lnJbhJhiibS  bbjlb  IbtLi  ^>h»  bbbbbb  Iblll 
I  IhHh  bbSjlb  blh^tolb  bah  b^kle  bile  lb  lbh 


||?||  ^m^iHE-thjPJHIUtej  H*l>  :taPhP»j>ltJlfc(£ 

I  IbblH  lnMb&b  labi  bb  lbili  Ibbb  blbl  b 


IICM1  :bk5j  bj  IbtahblS  iobb  bj£  llal^b  lbbjblblia  IblJS 
I  bjb  ihle  ilbk  bib  b  111  lJx.J£tjbb  :1b  Ibife  bib  lb  lb 


H>IIJ  OI1SAW  3H.L  O.L  SMWAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


7.  O  Fire,  give  us  the  vast  possessions,  the  thousandfold 
riches;  open  to  inspiration  like  gates  the  plenitude;  make 
Earth  and  Heaven  turned  to  the  Beyond  by  the  Word. 
The  Dawns  have  broken  into  splendour  as  if  there  shone 
the  brilliant  world  of  the  Sun. 

8.  Kindled  in  the  procession  of  the  beautiful  Dawns, 
he  shall  break  into  roseate  splendour  like  the  world  of  the 
Sun.  O  Fire,  making  effective  the  pilgrim-rite  by  man’s 
voices  of  offering,  thou  art  the  King  of  the  peoples  and 
the  Guest  delightful  to  the  human  being. 

9.  O  pristine  Fire,  even  thus  the  Thought  has  nourished 
our  human  things  in  the  immortals,  in  the  great  Heavens. 
The  Thought  is  our  milch-cow,  of  herself  she  milks  for  the 
doer  of  works  in  his  battles  and  in  his  speed  to  the  journey 
the  many  forms  and  the  hundreds  of  the  Treasure. 

10.  O  Fire,  let  us  conquer  a  hero-strength  by  the 
War-Horse,  or  let  us  awake  to  knowledge  beyond  men 
by  the  Word;1  let  our  light  shine  out  in  the  Five  Nations 
high  and  inviolable  like  the  world  of  the  Sun. 

11.  Awake,  O  forceful  Fire,  one  to  be  voiced  by  our 
lauds;  for  thou  art  he  in  whom  the  luminous  seers  come 
to  perfect  birth  and  speed  on  their  way.  O  Fire,  thou 
art  the  sacrifice  and  to  thee  the  Horses  of  swiftness  come 
there  where  thou  shinest  with  light  in  the  eternal  son 
and  in  thy  own  home. 


1  or,  wake  in  ourselves  a  strength  of  heroes  beyond  men’s  scope  by  the 
power  of  the  War-Horse  or  by  the  Word; 


69 


tlfell  kbU£b  lib  S-»bjPhaJe  Us  IS  lbiii  kb  US  b 

l  me  }b£  PitaMk  isjji  klbb  kkle  y±  ibbb  btle  Ij^gj# 


ll^ll  kibfr  BfePbP  >r>p_h  kbit  Vpthbak  mbit  IhKbb 
I  :bjbi  l^J±  bjis  :bbj  |t4Pj  klb£biU±lb  bjb  :bl£llb 


Hiri  k5>PjfcPiMT  klb£  (b£  u?4±&  :^h  ^ 

l  kifcibilbbit  Mji»i?bj  Sbib  ibabjb  :bkjbjKjle  (£bjb 


£  <fe£ 


HUM 


:mb£  bbbj  b|b  bkb  lie  bib  bjb  kj  is  bilb  bslbile 


Hhill  :b  h  jit  nifrihiai  :bblbJS  ‘.libit  ftii^bigtS  :bli  (bib 
I  \njMt  bile  (ilPIPi  ^  bibi  :b%bm  Ibibltb 


3HIJ  OIXSAH  XHX  OX  S.MWAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


12.  O  Fire,  O  God  who  knowest  all  things  born,  may  we 
both  abide  in  thy  peace,  those  who  hymn  thee  and  the 
luminous  seers.  Be  forceful  for  the  opulence  of  the  Trea¬ 
sure  with  the  multitude  of  its  riches  and  its  many  delights 
and  its  issue  and  the  offspring  of  the  Treasure. 

13.  When  to  those  who  hymn  thee  the  luminous 
Wise  set  free,  O  Fire,  the  gift  in  whose  front  the  Ray-Cow 
walks  and  whose  form  is  the  Horse,  thou  leadest  us  on  and 
leadest  them  to  a  world  of  greater  riches.  Strong  with 
the  strength  of  the  Heroes,  may  we  voice  the  Vast  in  the 
coming  of  the  knowledge. 


Sukta  3 

1.  The  Fire  that  was  set  inward  in  the  earth  is  kindled 
and  has  arisen  fronting  all  the  worlds.  He  has  arisen 
the  purifying  Flame,  the  priest  of  the  call,  the  wise  of 
understanding,  the  Ancient  of  Days.  Today  let  the  Fire 
in  the  fullness  of  his  powers,  a  god  to  the  gods,  do  sacrifice. 

2.  Fire  who  voices  the  godhead,  shines  revealing  the 
planes,  each  and  each;  high  of  ray  he  reveals,  each  and 
each,  the  triple  heavens  by  his  greatness.  Let  him  flood 
the  oblation  with  a  mind  that  diffuses  the  light  and 
manifest  the  gods  on  the  head  of  the  sacrifice. 

3.  O  Fire,  aspired  to  by  our  mind,  putting  forth 
today  thy  power  do  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  O  thou  who 
wast  of  old  before  aught  that  is  human.  Bring  to  us  the 
unfallen  host  of  the  Life-Gods;  and  you,  O  Powers,  sacri¬ 
fice  to  Indi  a  where  he  sits  on  the  seat  of  our  altar/ 


71 


cs  II 


tcm  gtara  wtt  fafwr  w*  ***■  i 

^  _  _  r~  _ ri _ 


ll^ll  \u.b^hh  ftSfc  :1£^  yMWi  4£ibfe&  ^  Sit 

I  ^feoji  frh?fr  imimifiE  £tej£  H  iHbH  HJlhfe3lB 


0< 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


MANDALA  TWO 


4.  O  Godhead,  strewn  is  the  seat  on  this  altar,  the 
hero-guarded  seat  that  ever  grows,  the  seat  well-packed 
for  the  riches1  anointed  with  the  Light.  O  all  Gods,  sit  on 
this  altar-seat,  sons  of  the  indivisible  Mother,  princes 
of  the  treasure,  kings  of  sacrifice. 


5.  May  the  divine  Doors  swing  open,  wide  to  our 
call,  easy  of  approach  with  our  prostrations  of  surrender; 
may  they  stretch  wide  opening  into  vastnesses,  the  imperi¬ 
shable  Doors  purifying  the  glorious  and  heroic  kind. 

6.  Milch-cows,  good  milkers,  pouring  out  on  us  may 
Night  and  Dawn,  the  eternal  and  equal  sisters,  come 
like  weaving  women  full  of  gladness,  weaving  out  the 
weft  that  is  spun,  the  weft  of  our  perfected  works  into  a 
shape  of  sacrifice. 

7.  The  two  divine  Priests  of  the  call,  the  first,  the  full 
in  wisdom  and  stature,  offer  by  the  illumining  Word 
the  straight  things  in  us;  sacrificing  to  the  Gods  in  season, 
they  reveal  them  in  light  in  the  navel  of  the  Earth  and  on 
the  three  peaks  of  Heaven. 


8.  May  Saraswati  effecting  our  thought  and  goddess 
Ila  and  Bharati  who  carries  all  to  their  goal,  the  three 
goddesses,  sit  on  our  altar-seat  and  guard  by  the  self-law 
of  things  our  gapless  house  of  refuge. 


1  or,  made  strong  to  bear  for  the  riches, 


73 


ulu  j»|fe  ^tainty^  yi  j£±y. 


a  m 


HUH  hink  i&JJe  .Kfck  PifelSlW  friftMh  kb  ikfeialdie 
I  Mb  IrtE-tPk  pk>j|j7  toJtPfe  PSiiJJiJ  nk 


Ho hjPhjlS  &hh  bbkH  itetj 

I  :hJ4J?.  is  Pjltxk  hT“PPP>PJh-iPP 


H'bll  :*Xh  fcjnhlblfe%  ibK:  (trhKJiX  bin  fej  ]23fej  U£iS 
I  :hi*fe»  Htm  Uak  :lhjfcfe  UhS  :h^ii£l£bj 


3UId  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


9.  Soon  there  is  born  a  Hero  of  golden-red  form, 
an  aspirant  to  the  Godheads,  a  mighty  bringer  of  riches 
and  founder  of  our  growth  to  wideness.  Let  the  Maker 
of  forms  loosen  the  knot  of  the  navel  in  us,  let  him  set  free 
the  issue  of  our  works;  then  let  him  walk  on  the  way  of  the 
Gods.1 

10.  The  Plant  is  with  us  streaming  out  the  Wine. 
Fire  speeds  the  oblation  by  our  thoughts.  Let  the  divine 
Achiever  of  works,  understanding,  lead  the  offering 
triply  revealed2  in  his  light  on  its  way  to  the  Godheads. 

1 1.  I  pour  on  him  the  running  light;  for  the  light  is  his 
native  lair,  he  is  lodged  in  the  light,  the  light  is  his  plane. 
According  to  thy  self-nature,  bring  the  Gods  and  fill 
them  with  rapture.  O  Male  of  the  herd,  carry  to  them 
our  offering  blessed3  with  Swdhd. 


Sukta  4 


1.  I  call  to  you  the  Fire  with  his  strong  delights  and 
his  splendours  of  light,  Fire  who  strips  all  sin  from  us, 
the  guest  of  the  peoples.  He  becomes  like  a  supporting 
friend,  he  becomes  the  God  who  knows  all  things  bom  in 
the  man  with  whom  are  the  Gods.4 


1  or,  let  the  way  of  the  Gods  come  to  us. 

2  or,  triply  anointed 

3  or,  made  into  Swdhd. 

4  or,  in  all  from  men  to  the  Gods. 


75 


nail  hit  u*t?»»»te]te>iMit.  klnahilhhle  lhahJJJi  :ht}le 

l  PjMth  jhli&&  hJNfrfrha  yi  h 


ll^ll  :hjlhh  (Pihhh*  tijie  P*^jbf.>  Sh  ikallna^ 
I  u^i»»  htoi  hah  hib  HJlh  h  jlnlhfoh  Ihh  Jh  he 


llVill  hh  lfeh  liih  Jh  ifekh  lhlh  Si  B%hJ  khJfeJ  h 
I  hkh  h^ahjlh  Ifcultj^hh  :hhh  h-tle  %ib  lie 


llxll  pi>ip  PJ^h|i  Jhai  h  JhhtllLy  hyha^iijh  ^h  hj 
I  :yii  w-»uih^j  h4>?app  ;2aj£  hhitai  ihoi  bile 


ilfen  he  hi  ^fclli  jh  ^ithisi  he  ^-t^|Pi^i?fi^  £ 
I  Wfchj  h  Ihihii?  :h  fcfcj  febj  tUbkh  Jhih^  ktjie 


Hill  :pfei>^H'Pj>'>u>jmpifc>^  lhh  I'HE’rfrJ  hb 

I  :jfch2ShJ  IhhhhiihSj  feihh  lhle  JhhhaJ  ha 


HHIJ  0I1SAH  3 HI  OA  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


2.  The  Bhrigus  worshipping  in  the  session  of  the 
Waters  set  him  a  twofold  Light  in  the  peoples  of  Man. 
May  he  master  all  planes  prevailing  vastly,  Fire  the 
traveller  of  the  Gods  with  his  rapid  horses. 

3.  As  men  who  would  settle  in  a  home  bring  into  it  a 
beloved  friend,  the  Gods  have  set  the  Fire  in  these  human 
peoples.  Let  him  illumine  the  desire  of  the  billowing 
nights,  let  him  be  one  full  of  discerning  mind  in  the  house 
for  the  giver  of  sacrifice. 

4.  Delightful  is  his  growth  as  if  one’s  own  increase, 
rapturous  is  his  vision  as  he  gallops  burning  on  his  way. 
He  darts  about  his  tongue  mid  the  growths  of  the  forest 
and  tosses  his  mane  like  a  chariot  courser. 

5.  When  my  thoughts  enjoying  him  chant  his  mighti¬ 
ness,  he  shapes  hue  of  kind  as  if  to  our  desire.  He  awakes 
to  knowledge  in  men  that  have  the  ecstasy  by  the  rich 
diversity  of  his  light;  old  and  outworn  he  grows  young 
again  and  again. 

6.  Like  one  who  thirsts  he  lifts  his  light  on  the  forests; 
his  roar  is  like  the  cry  of  waters  on  their  path,  he  neighs 
like  a  chariot  war-horse.  Black  is  his  trail,  burning  his 
heat;  he  is  full  of  rapture  and  awakes  to  knowledge:  he 
is  like  Father  Heaven  smiling  with  his  starry  spaces. 

7.  He  starts  on  his  journey  to  burn  through  all  wide 
earth  and  moves  like  a  beast  that  wanders  at  will  and 
has  no  keeper;  Fire  with  his  blazing  light  and  his  black 
affliction  assails  the  dry  trunks  with  his  heat  as  if  he 
tasted  the  vastness. 


77 


Ilfell  PPKIPPJtiPXhjP  PJlbtPJ  IJh 

I  HP  k%  lnjllip  PPJP  PkJPP  IP  £±M 


llhll  PJPiXJP  P£PJ  itah 
I  XJPP  PiPP  lPP*Ph£l  P-iP^hiJP  lie 


IU II  k±J2  (PttjlP  ]±%P  Bp  P^ttPK 
l  ppx  P.tPPj  ikhj  :pp%  2aPJPlPjk 

v,  <£a 


ll^ll  :lfe  |MP  Pink  tkiJaPJlkPJK  yil^teS 

I  :pa  fejle  l>.h£  PiP±P  lMt  PP?  IPiPPialt  ii?.P  1PP> 


ll?ll  M  pp.  MP  Piltfe  P±M>  >|PPP  Pile  pa? 

l  ays  j±±p  hfrfcj  h|PP  piPi?  ^  t 


rxaia  oixsAi-v  a  hi  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  TWO 


8.  Now  in  our  mind’s  return  on  thy  former  safe¬ 
guarding,  our  thought  has  been  spoken  in  the  third 
session  of  the  knowledge.  O  Fire,  give  us  the  treasure 
with  its  children;  give  us  a  vast  and  opulent  plenitude 
where  the  heroes  assemble. 

9.  To  the  luminous  Wise  Ones  and  to  him  who  voices 
thee,  O  Fire,  be  the  founder  of  their  growth  and  expan¬ 
sion,  that  the  Gritsamadas  strong  with  the  strength  of  the 
Heroes  and  overcoming  the  hostile  forces  may  conquer 
the  higher  worlds  by  thy  force  and  take  delight  of1  the  sec¬ 
ret  inner  spaces. 


Sukta  5 

1.  A  conscious  Priest  of  the  call  is  born  to  us;  a  father 
is  born  to  his  fathers  for  their  safeguard.  May  we  avail 
to  achieve  by  sacrifice  the  wealth  that  is  for  the  victor,2 
and  to  rein  the  Horse  of  swiftness. 

2.  The  seven  rays  are  extended  in  this  leader  of  sacri¬ 
fice;  there  is  a  divine  eighth  that  carries  with  it  the 
human.  The  Priest  of  the  purification  takes  possession 
of3  That  All. 

3.  When  a  man  has  firmly  established  this  Fire,  he 
echoes  the  Woids  of  knowledge  and  comes  to  That:4  for 
he  embraces  all  seer-wisdoms  as  the  rim  surrounds  a  wheel. 


1  or,  win 

2  or,  the  wealth  that  has  to  be  conquered, 

3  or,  travels  to  (reaches). 

1  or,  and  comes  to  know: 


79 


08 


n?n  kuk  m2  b  hpe  tuitms 

I  :tebM2  lb.ttebgp.ife  lie  lltej  lteb 


lie\li  kbte  lbip  llibte  Iteite  bb  Wbi 
1  W^bJjUb^JkluTnCfe  ^h)h»  hlb>  :fe£ 


ll^ll  blip  teliate  ]teb  (bbilbbahlblb 
I  btel]fr-b>,tt  bte  lbtei  ha&Ui  iteb 


llVill  :bb  b£  ib  pibtei  Ate  lie  i2iHHJbjI 
I  :tebte  :iab  Iteblhtote  bile  lb 


llxll  bill  bite!  lbte  IteH  Lbte  bile  lib] 
I  uj^iP&k  lbilllis  :te]ib  Ibtejlb  %  Mb 


•1313  01  AS  AIM  3HA  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


4.  Pure,  the  Priest  of  the  annunciation  is  born  along 
with  the  pure  will.  The  man  who  knows  the  laws  of  his 
workings  that  are  steadfast  for  ever,  climbs  them  one 
by  one  like  branches. 


5.  The  milch-cows  come  to  and  cleave  to  the  hue  of 
Light1  of  this  Priest  of  the  lustration,  the  Sisters  who 
have  gone  once  and  again  to  that  Supreme  over  the  three.2 

6.  When  the  sister  of  the  Mother  comes  to  him  bring¬ 
ing  the  yield  of  the  Light,  the  Priest  of  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice  rejoices  in  her  advent  as  a  field  of  barley  revels 
in  the  rain. 


7.  Himself  for  his  own  confirming  let  the  priest  of  the 
rite  create  the  priest;  let  us  take  joy  of  the  laud  and  the 
sacrifice,  for  then  it  is  complete,3  what  we  have  given.4 


8.  Even  as  one  who  has  the  knowledge  let  him  work 
out  the  rite  for  all  the  lords  of  the  sacrifice.  On  thee,  O 
Fire,  is  this  sacrifice  that  we  have  made. 


1  or,  the  hue  of  kind 

2  the  fourth  world,  Turiyam  above  the  three,  so  called  in  the  Rigveda 
turiyam  swid. 

3  or,  for  then  it  is  complete,  we  have  moved  (on  the  way). 

4  or,  let  us  take  full  joy  of  the  laud  and  the  sacrifice;  for  we  have  given. 


81 


lUlt  IjJi  satejfe 

I  liiij  til  9^jh  %jai=>uafelg| 


llVill  :k  a 

hlnp>Iihl£lte  it  a  £ajfe  Ik  & 


iixii  ajm|  stLitomt 
i  Hhfife  bjys  a 


tun  :i>&b£  bJ2ha 

4  A 

I  :£jjnfej£  tilofeJS  aiiLfeltjaj^ii  Ik-  k 


llfcll  Plfrft  U±b 

I  y>t+Jbi;t>lhU  ttte  ^  li2K 


Hill  :£lij  UUss  Ja  £  l±t£ 

i  :tfe  ^ahKtikhjaaja  tile  j±  ik£ 


h  £& 


H'ai.I  OI  IS  AN  3HJL  OX  SNNAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


SUKTA  6 

1.  O  Fire,  mayst  thou  rejoice  in  the  fuel  I  bring  thee, 
rejoice  in  my  session  of  sacrifice.  Deeply  lend  ear  to  my 
words. 

2.  O  Fire,  who  art  brought  to  perfect  birth,  Child  of 
Energy,  Impeller  of  the  Horse,  we  would  worship  thee 
with  this  oblation,  wc  would  worship  thee  with  this 
Word  well-spoken. 

3.  We  would  wait  with  our  Words  on  thy  joy  in  the 
Word;  O  Treasure-giver,  we  would  wait  on  the  seeker  of 
the  Treasure.  Let  us  serve  thee,  all  whose  desire  is  thy 
service. 


4.  O  Wealth-Lord,  Wealth-giver,  awake,  a  seer  and  a 
Master  of  Treasures;  put  away  from  us  the  things  that 
are  hostile. 

5.  For  us,  O  Fire,  the  Rain  of  Heaven  around  us!  for 
us,  O  Fire,  the  wealth  immovable,1  for  us,  O  Fire,  the 
impulsions  that  bring  their  thousands. 

6.  O  Messenger,  O  youngest  Power,  come  at  our  word 
for  him  who  aspires  to  thee  and  craves  for  thy  safeguard; 
arrive,  O  Priest  of  the  call,  strong  for  sacrifice. 


or,  free  from  all  littleness, 


83 


*8 


llVill  :blmtjjbhl2ate 
I  :bjl£&ibjll£b  biibilb  JttJK  lb  Jb 

11*11  :blllbjlib  bi 
I  gj£b  biSJEib  ±hlh  :bjii 

Hfell  :b%  %bklt  bJK' 
I  b£  Lt-^bb  mb  bb  ibbi  bb  ibibj 

\\h\\  :b£j  bb  Ibib  b^h 
1  fe  bibib  b£b£  blb^bjms  lb  lb 

uin  ktyi  Mm£  mb 

I  lb  ihb»Hfr  bilbilb  Sabjb  Sabs 

6\  M 


l l?ll  bjBjb  mjbbbijlb  lie 
l  ifebblK  biibjbj  ttjb  ibishj  b  IK  l£bj  b 


lieMi  :b£bj  bbib  <b£ 
l  ih>nHa|r  mPej  w>r^P-»K> 


71  >11. 1  OIXSAK  3H1  OJ.  SMKAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


7.  O  Fire,  O  seer,  thou  movest  within  having  know¬ 
ledge  of  both  the  Births;1  thou  art  like  a  messenger  from 
a  friendly  people.2 

8.  Come  with  thy  knowledge,  O  Conscious  Fire,  and 
fill  us;  perform  the  unbroken  order  of  the  sacrifice.  Take 
thy  seat  on  the  sacred  grass  of  our  altar. 


Sukta  7 

1.  O  Fire,  O  Youngest  Power!  Fire  of  the  Bringers, 
Prince  of  the  Treasure,  bring  to  us  a  wealth,  the  best, 
made  all  of  light  and  packed  with  our  many  desires. 

2.  Let  not  the  Force  that  wars  against  us  master  the 
God  and  the  mortal  ;3  carry  us  beyond  that  hostile  power. 

3.  And  so  by  thee  may  we  plunge  and  pass  beyond  all 
hostile  forces  as  through  streams  of  rushing  water. 

4.  O  cleansing  Fire,  thou  art  pure  and  adorable;  vast 
is  the  beauty  of  thy  light  fed  with  the  charities. 

5.  O  Fire  of  the  Bringers,  thou  art  called  by4  our  bulls 
and  our  heifers  and  by  our  eight-footed  Kine.5 


1  or,  as  one  who  has  knowledge  between  both  births; 

2  or,  like  a  friendly  universal  messenger. 

3  or,  against  us,  God  and  mortal,  overmaster  us; 

4  or,  fed  with 

6  or,  by  our  bulls  and  by  our  barren  and  pregnant  kine.  ashtapadi  literally 
eight-footed. 


i 


85 


98 


llV>u  hi  yhfcj  hjie  iiiij 
i:hklk  klU^hktjklixmk  kkhjie 


llxll  hj>>tf-.t£  (Ktesie 
l  ita^jh^ikiaj  |k>aj  iblkh  kk±  :h  lie 


llfell  kWh  k  kk  kit 
I  ttjh|tay>  miy  £-  a 


ubii  :klke  a?\PKiak 
i  kyftiah;  yhkshkiii  y^kS  :n 

\\l ll  :ja§£211±  hmkllSh 

I  £j£->  hi>U>KN  lb|h-»lt?>  k  bKjfrttvIb 


?  m. 


w\n  :kkiie  y-fok£k 

I  lkl|  IkilS  :kjftl>hjH  :k£ 


PIJ  OIASAK1  HHX  OX  SNIMAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


6.  This  is  the  eater  of  the  Tree  for  whom  is  poured 
the  running  butter  of  the  Light;  this  is  the  Desirable,  the 
ancient,  the  Priest  of  the  call,  the  Wonderful,  the  son 
of  Force. 


Sukta  8 

1.  As  if  to  replenish1  him  chant  now  the  chariots  of 
Fire  and  his  yokings,  Fire  the  lavish  and  glorious  God¬ 
head. 

2.  He  brings  his  perfect  leading  to  the  man  who  has 
given;  he  is  invulnerable  and  wears  out  with  wounds  the 
foe.  Fair  is  the  front  of  him  fed  with  the  offerings. 


3.  He  is  voiced  in  his  glory  and  beauty  at  dusk  and 
dawn  in  our  homes.  Never  impaired  is  the  law  of  his 
working. 


4.  He  shines  rich  with  diverse  lustres  like  the  heavens 
of  the  Sun2  in  his  illumining  splendour,  shines  wide  with 
his  ray,  putting  forth  on  us  a  revealing  light  with  his 
ageless  fires. 

5.  Our  words  have  made  the  Fire  to  grow,  made  the 
Traveller  to  grow  in  the  way  of  self-empire;  he  holds  in 
himself  all  glory  and  beauty. 


1  or,  as  one  seeking  for  plenitude 

"  or,  like  the  Sun 


87 


88 


IlfeU  fei  IS  b  Si2 

I  >P>hlP4  bfcfej  fcl&b±lE  ^ib  H  bhbj 


Hill  UhUi  fej^9ft^>aahKmPPP  Hfrlh  ftbfe^b  bile 
I  ipi^k  H-hb  lie  b±b  ^->ih-»h  :b  bfr^P^  fei 


Mill  :tijle  l^bjfejls 


I  :n>sfc>frPte  JbijiS 


\)  m 


ll^ll  :P)?^h  hlba  Hjjib%b  ibibaijle 

I  WhiahjPjimME^  tnh^  tiSi^bbe 


n>II;l  OIXSAIV  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


6.  May  we  cleave  to  the  safeguardings  of  the  Fire  and 
Soma  and  Indra  and  of  the  Gods,  meeting  with  no 
hurt  overcome  those  that  are  embattled  against  us. 


Sukta  9 

1.  The  priest  of  the  call  has  taken  his  seat  in  the 
house  of  his  priesthood;  he  is  ablaze  with  light  and 
vivid  in  radiance,  he  is  full  of  knowledge  and  perfect  in 
judgment.  He  has  a  mind  of  wisdom  whose  workings 
arc  invincible  and  is  most  rich  in  treasures:  Fire  with  his 
tongue  of  purity  is  a  bringer  of  the  thousand. 

2.  Thou  art  the  Messenger,  thou  art  our  protector  who 
takest  us  to  the  other  side;  O  Bull  of  the  herds,  thou  art 
our  leader  on  the  way  to  a  world  of  greater  riches.  For 
the  shaping  of  the  Son  and  the  building  of  the  bodies1 
awake  in  thy  light,  a  guardian,  and  turn  not  from  thy 
work,  O  Fire. 

3.  May  we  worship  thee  in  thy  supreme  Birth,  O  Fire; 
may  we  worship  thee  with  our  chants  in  the  world  of  thy 
lower  session:  I  adore  with  sacrifice  thy  native  lair  from 
which  thou  hast  arisen.  The  offerings  have  been  cast 
into  thee  when  thou  wert  kindled  and  ablaze. 

4.  O  Fire,  be  strong  for  sacrifice,  do  worship  with  my 
oblation;  swiftly  voice  my  thought  towards  the  gift 
of  the  Treasure.  For  thou  art  the  wealth-master  who 
hast  power  over  the  riches,  thou  art  the  thinker  of  the 
brilliant  Word. 


1  or,  in  the  o  ffspring  of  the  son  of  our  bodies 


89 


:tekfe}  bb  ip$ji>  bl  IblhS 

I  -iPPbj  |pu^.pj|j>pj)pi;bj  ^  b5pikkbtjP>jk  Lbfe 


It&M  \tMt»  H  :Jt&bte  k-kh  iPbbj  iPkk  Iklbb  bty 
I  ifrkjk^h  ihkk  ^hWbPhj  :hbK  :bijte  mlm 


ll^ll  Sj(bSjb^  P?kfe  bite  ihiih  :fc  k£  IhIU  Iteite 

l  bijbi  :.<2atejmte  ib£  12ab  ^ite  IkfcEjS  H’fclHHft 


UV)||  :bil  frH^hk*  bjh  bj£  Kh>IP>Jte  Jbhte  bj£ 
l  nib  ftiHhlrlte  b£J%£j  hattfe  kbite  k  H  bb£ 


3*11.4  OIXS’AK  3111  Ol  SMJAIAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


5,  Both  kinds  of  wealth  are  thine,  O  potent  Godhead 
and  because  thou  art  born  from  day  to  day,-  neither  can 
waste  and  perish.  O  Fire,  make  thy  adorer  one  full  of 
possessions;  make  him  a  master  of  the  Treasure  and  of 
wealth  rich  in  progeny. 


6.  O  Fire,  shine  forth  with  this  force1  of  thine  in  us, 
one  perfect  in  knowledge,  one  who  worships  the  Gods 
and  is  strong  for  sacrifice.  Be  our  indomitable  guardian 
and  our  protector  to  take  us  to  the  other  side;  flame  in 
us  with  thy  light,  flame  in  us  with  thy  opulence. 


SUKTA  10 

1.  Fire  is  to  us  as  our  first  father  and  to  him  must  rise 
our  call  when  he  is  kindled  by  man  in  the  seat  of  his 
aspiration.  He  puts  on  glory  and  beauty  like  a  robe; 
he  is  our  Horse  of  swiftness  full  of  inspiration  to  be  groomed 
by  us,  he  is  the  immortal  wide  in  knowledge. 


2.  May  Fire  in  the  rich  diversity  of  his  lights,  the 
immortal  wide  in  knowledge,  hearken  to  my  cry  in  all 
its  words.  Two  tawny  horses  bear  him  or  two  that  are 
red  or  ruddy  in  glow:  Oh,  one  widely  borne  has  been 
created. 


1  or,  form 


91 


26 


mpfr  feLKh  DrlK-fe  ll&  Hjhhlite 
|  t+*.9bUb  ^IpStfcO  In^b  Ulit  ifc£ 


llV)H  :iidilUE  U»H  gkyjPhiJle  yuSiilbi  :*&£fct 

|  DbU-X'P  l»Uk  »P«»b->hUj  b-clPK  :Pktfc}  JJE 


llAll  buntb  lihi  b>w«?dbjh»  P*£l>  IPhfe  IP^.Pj  i»h 
1  Ibfcbj  bjlbbH.  b>frKlJPjK  Ihfejl  PfjfttfiPJ 


||£||  -iPbK  PJPb  |Pb|>h>kjl£h  IpfcfrfefeJ  lMlnlJlSJ 

l  :Hlt  Sus^S  :faijlfeh 


33Id  OHS  AIM  3H1  Ol  SMMAH 


MANDALA  TWO 


3.  They  have  given  him  birth  in  one  laid  supine  who 
with  happy  delivery  bore  him;  the  Fire  became  a  child 
in  mothers  of  many  forms.  This  thinker  and  knower 
by  the  greatness  of  his  lights  dwells1  even  in  the  destroying 
Night  unenveloped  by  the  darkness. 

4.  I  anoint  the  Fire  with  my  oblation  of  light,  where 
he  dwells  fronting  all  the  worlds;  wide  in  his  horizontal 
expansion  and  vast,  he  is  most  open  and  manifest  by  all 
he  has  fed  on,  seen  in  the  impetuosity  of  his  force.2 

5.  I  anoint  him  where  he  moves  fronting  all  things 
on  every  side;  let  him  rejoice  in  That  with  a  mind3  that 
withholds  not  the  riches.  None  can  touch  the  body  of  the 
Fire  where  he  plays  in  his  desire  of  the  hues  of  light4 
in  his  strong  and  glorious  beauty. 

6.  Mayst  thou  take  knowledge  of  thy  portion  putting 
forth  thy  force  with  thy  supreme  flame;  may  we  speak 
as  the  thinking  human  being  with  thee  for  Messenger. 

I  am  one  who  would  conquer  the  Treasure  and  I  call 
to  the  Fire  with  my  power  of  speech  and  my  flame  of 
offering,  Fire  in  whom  is  no  insufficiency,  and  he  brings 
to  us  the  touch  of  the  sweetness.5 


1  or,  shines 

2  or,  in  the  violence  of  his  rapture. 

3  or,  with  a  mind  without  the  will  to  injure. 

4  or,  with  his  desire-waking  hue 

5  or,  he  fills  us  with  the  wine  of  sweetness. 


a9 


93 


MANDALA  THREE 


96 


llxll  WhqKfe  khfajis  P>|K-  ibfcViUb+hPIU'  fc  Tclfrj 

I  Ib^Jk  tafrkPllitt'  Pbc  :l£Sfr  Pik  IifcSikbkK 


llfell  kllnPP^  kJhkPjfr  (mE>frP*fr»lhPIJffe  K-^PJK 
I  :i*wt>jh  itapu^bfc  (ttfrpK  :ibj^  tejfe  Jfch 


nhn  :*^En>  k%i  »iml> 

i  Ph4b^  iphp  p.^^jkjp  :yi  mfete  h.^fe  ten  p-^ik 


Hill  fc^btrv  JgiH  P>k  hlklS  £Jie  l^eh  IfialS  Ik| 

I  tolEJ2  h£h}  fcjfefe  %£  btbSJa  JUtt 


\ 

:^i±ll^  iidfeJLLU 


GATHINA  VISHWAMITRA 


SUKTA  1 

1.  Bear  me  that  I  may  be  strong  to  hold  the  wine, 
O  Fire,  for  thou  hast  made  me  a  carrier  flame  of  sacrifice 
in  the  getting  of  knowledge :  I  shine  towards  the  gods,  I 
put  the  stone  to  its  work,  I  accomplish  the  labour;1  O  Fire, 
take  delight  in  my  body. 

2.  YVe  have  made  the  sacrifice  with  its  forward  move¬ 
ment,  may  the  word  increase  in  us;  with  the  fuel,  with 
the  obeisance  they  have  set  the  Fire  to  its  work.  The 
heavens  have  declared  the  discoveries  of  knowledge  of 
the  seers  and  they  have  willed  a  path  for  the  strong 
and  wise. 

3.  Full  of  understanding,  pure  in  discernment,  close 
kin  horn  his  birth  to  earth  and  heaven  he  has  founded  the 
Bliss.  The  gods  discovered  the  seeing  Fire  within  in  the 
waters,  in  the  work  of  the  sisters. 


4.  The  seven  mighty  rivers  increased  the  blissful  flame,2 
white  in  his  birth,  ruddy  glowing  in  his  mightiness:  the 
Mares  went  up  to  him  as  to  a  new-born  child;  the  gods 
gave  body  to  Agni  in  his  birth. 


1  or,  I  attain  to  the  peace; 

2  or,  increased  him  in  his  beauty, 


97 


86 


\\\\\  feiUs  iMt  kfej i^h  ^ 

I  :lbfe  fe}  mb  i^fej  LEihfb^b  *?]£*?] 


\\?\\  uhci«fe  ht.ii»  fen  not  iatk  jfenfe  mis 

i  fajhh.  uifei  ifc-tt  :kife£  nyana  ttfe  :iau;^n 


lie\||  ^fe^ttfe  i>PIH  b»h->b  IHhteabJ  :fefefe  feifeiK: 
I  felfefefe  bb!6  |b^b  feifefe  Ife^feileJ  niK 


II^K  t^jhib  feafe  Hfe  :fefefefe  fete  lfefe 

I  :LbikJE  iuiub>^h  JfeiJ  ife»r>>\P?»tJh^  lfeinfe 


UV,||  :ibb>\p^b  JfefcJ  lfeinpjh  :femfefejy5 

I  :kbjh  :HJb)<b  :fclb£  fe!fc  Ulb-»PPII?  fei  UiSife^feiS 


g-au  OIXSAIV  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


5.  With  his  bright  limbs  he  has  built  wide  the  mid  world 
purifying  the  will  by  his  pure  seer-powers;  wearing  light 
like  a  robe  around  the  life  of  the  waters  he  forms  his 
glories  vast  and  ample. 

6.  He  moved  all  round  the  seven  mighty  Ones  of 
heaven :  undevouring,  inviolate,  neither  were  they  clothed 
nor  were  they  naked :  here  young  and  eternal  in  one  native 
home  the  seven  Voices  held  in  their  womb  the  one  Child. 


7.  Wide-strewn,  compact,  taking  universal  forms  are 
his  energies  in  the  womb  of  the  light,  in  the  streaming  of 
the  sweetnesses :  here  the  milch-cows  stand  nourished  and 
growing;  two  great  and  equal  companions1  are  the 
mothers  of  the  Doer  of  works. 

8.  Upborne,  O  Son  of  Force,  thou  shinest  out  wide  hold¬ 
ing  thy  bright  and  rapturous  bodies;  there  drip  down 
streams  of  the  light  and  the  sweetness,  there  where  the 
Bull  has  grown  by  the  seer-wisdom. 

9.  At  his  birth  he  discovered  the  teat  of  abundance  of 
the  Father,  he  loosed  forth  wide  his  streams,  wide  his 
nourishing  rivers;2  he  discovered  him  moving  in  the 
secrecy  with  his  helpful  comrades,  with  the  mighty 
Rivers  of  Heaven,  but  himself  became  not  secret  in  the 
cave. 


1  or,  vast  and  whole 

2  or,  he  loosed  forth  the  milch-cows; 


99 


001 


llxfell  tltelll  teltte  >.lh>Ki±te  MJMtt  2il  te|It 

I  :  Ufa  It  t  \urab]  t^M<fe|Mfclk  (bUItt  M£ 


life  fell  strife?  j»t>p  Mite  poMjh  :ht±te  %  i£  Iftkh'KJH^ 
I  klv&bj  liihS  M1M*  )Pb  j^frta^kPjtfr  &ll  1 hie 


life.  ^  ||  :Mjte  |>+pl»  JMM  ihsiteitete  JM  ilibjte  lft!4J?£ 
I  :<fey*3teiM  tekfi  iitl^k  tetejte  k  l&te 


life  fell  t»jh~>UfjkiMkite  ifaUbtfe  teMteklkiM  IrtPte 

l  :jk£  Ij  M  :te lit  kijte  IMSsyatete  MIEkJte  lik  Jik 


llofell  Sjlh  it]  Mite  MM  Jp.ikM  hfr-M  ^kihli  Mate 

I  :iMUL4iMMtete  MMfeikM  tesStjte  MM  iisfchj 


71 'HH  OIXSAK'  3H.L  0.1.  SNPMAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


10.  He  carried  the  child  of  the  father  who  begot  him; 
one,  he  sucked  the  milk  of  many  who  nourished  him 
with  their  overflowing.  Two  who  have  one  lord  and 
kinsman,  for  this  pure  male  of  the  herds  guard  both  in 
the  human  being. 

11.  Vast  was  he  in  the  unobstructed  wideness  and  grew, 
for  the  waters  many  and  glorious  fed  the  flame;  in  the 
native  seat  of  the  Truth  the  Fire  lay  down  and  made 
his  home,  in  the  work  of  the  companions,  the  sisters. 


12.  Like  a  height1  upbearing  all  in  the  meeting  of  the 
great  waters,  eager  for  vision  for  the  Son,  straight  in  his 
lustres,  he  is  the  Father  who  begot  the  shining  Ray- 
herds,  the  child  of  the  Waters,  the  most  strong  and  mighty 
Fire. 

13.  One  desirable  and  blissful  gave  birth  to  him  in  many 
forms,  a  visioned  child  of  the  waters  and  a  child  of  the 
growths  of  earth:  the  gods  too  met  with  the  Mind  the  Fire, 
strong  at  his  birth  and  powerful  to  act2  and  set  him  to 
his  work. 


14.  Vast  sun  blazings  cleave  like  brilliant  lightnings  to 
this  Fire,  straight  in  his  lustres,  growing  as  in  a  secret 
cave  within  in  his  own  home  in  the  shoreless  wideness, 
and  they  draw  the  milk  of  immortality. 


1  or,  like  one  moving  and  upbearing  all 

2  or,  most  admirable 


101 


Lfnrverslty  of  Southern  California  UfeagGJ? 


:k  lllfe  feJk£ 

ikmik  :hj%akj$h  kliUAjkliy  Utjbiai  Ijk  *fc  ue 


ll?ill  uiSbj  ujihoKfc  l.hfej£  a>|PttP& 

I  pmp  kjite»i»j  td&s  lisii  mbih  yatte  kj 


nc\in  kbiH  kjik  Jiiyi  kk£  ke  ikkk  j£h  iyjs 

I  UlSbj  Pjlhal-fe  Pjlfctkj  42iit  kti§%  :fettHIKlfe^  ii£ 


11^ ill  Plfc^VfrlPPh  hi  to  HJie  ikkii^B  JHkfcs  IPP.^£ 
I  :lklfck  Ikifc  kjlkSfcj  kiSHynisE:  kkiimtehk 


llUn  ra^klkjtofe  <t  t  mi  kljk  &  £jy±itj  ^ijs^ 

I  thltbhj  PJhfc  toK>jh  <”(>hjfcj$  \hlhlfr|?  Iki  k:  2£| 


3tfIJ  OI.LSAK  3HA  OJ.  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


15.  Making  sacrifice  with  my  offerings  for  thee  I  pray, 
and  pray  for  thy  friendship  and  true-mindedness  with 
an  utter  desire.  Fashion  with  the  Gods  protection  for  thy 
adorer  and  guard  us  with  thy  flame  forces  that  dwell 
in  the  house. 

16.  We  who  come  to  thee  to  dwell  with  thee  in  thy 
home,  O  perfect  leader  of  the  way,  holding1  all  opulent 
things,  may  we,  overflowing  them  with  the  full  stream  of 
inspiration,  overwhelm  the  hostile  army  of  the  undivine 
powers. 

17.  O  Fire,  thou  becomcst  in  us  the  rapturous  ray  of 
intuition  of  the  gods  that  knows  all  seer-wisdoms;  estab¬ 
lished  in  thy  home  thou  settlest  mortals  in  that  dwelling- 
place,  as  their  charioteer  achieving  their  aini  thou 
journeyest  in  the  wake  of  the  gods. 


18.  In  the  gated  house  of  mortals  the  immortal  sat  as 
King  accomplishing  the  things  of  knowledge:  the  Fire 
shone  out  in  his  wideness  with  his  luminous  front,  knower 
of  all  seer- wisdoms. 

19.  Come  to  us  in  a  rapid  approach  with  thy  happy 
befriendings,  mighty,  come  with  thy  mighty  protectings; 
in  us  the  abundance  of  the  delivering  riches,  for  us  our 
glorious  high-worded  portion  create. 


or,  smiting 


103 


It <4 II  tejteohte  :i^j£  te  tel  Itetej  |Ptelb  blhkk  VIP'S  JLteSj 
I  tejhlhte  htetteP.fi  te  tete  teNPhllnhhJ  m>teltett» 


h  ^ 


Itfchll  fcitetetetejhL  te  m  teiSJteJJiteJ  Jteteteitefe  :&lte 
I  tem  teltelhtei*  HP-tetii;  :jj*  PtteKnS 


nihil  teitete  mintejp  %te  tetSJte  lhVJ|pbbP|S  ajte  JS 
I  :  in  ill  JBteS  £jte  itetej  <te  tel  kMkSk  £& 


Uiill  kite!  PPte^P  Jih  bjsiteJtePjh  |Ptefi  tete  kite 
I  :j^i£js  bh-->jtejKtejihthj  i^pii*  |pSjkj  tek^h-u, 


llohll  :l»PPIP  |PSjtej  kk-^k-.P'  lkP&  Ikbk  !mb  kjlSk 
I  k&Jte  tejitePte  te^tesfi  JS  tejitek  ikkjpv  telle  te  mb 


HUIi  OIASAJM  3HA  OX  SMJ\TAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


20.  O  Fire,  these  are  thy  eternal  births  which  I  have 
declared  to  thee,  ever  new  births  for  the  ancient  flame: 
great  arc  the  offerings  of  the  Wine  we  have  made  for  the 
mighty  one.  He  is  the  knower  of  all  births  set  within 
in  birth  and  birth. 

21.  The  knower  of  all  births  set  within  in  birth  and 
birth  is  kindled  by  Vishwamitra,  an  unceasing  flame;  in 
the  true  thinking  of  this  lord  of  sacrifice,  in  a  happy 
right-mindedness  may  we  abide. 

22.  O  forceful  god,  O  strong  will,  establish  this  sacrifice 
of  ours  in  the  gods  and  take  in  it  thy  delight:  O  priest 
of  the  call,  extend  to  us  the  vast  impulsions ;  O  Fire,  bring 
to  us  by  sacrifice  the  great  Treasure. 

23.  O  Fire,  achieve  at  my  call  the  Revealing  Speech, 
the  many-actioned,  the  lasting  conquest  of  the  Light. 
May  there  be  for  us  a  Son  of  our  begetting  pervading1  in 
his  birth;  O  Fire,  may  there  be  created  in  us  that  true 
thinking  of  thine. 


Sukta  2 

1.  We  create  an  understanding  like  pure  light  for  the 
Fire  that  makes  the  Truth  to  grow,  for  the  universal 
godhead.  The  priests  of  the  word  fashion  twofold  by  the 
thought  of  the  human  being2  this  priest  of  the  cal),  as  the 
saw  carves  a  chariot,  and  join  him  into  a  whole. 


1  or,  himself  a  begetter 

2  or,  the  human  priest  of  the  word  by  their  thought 


105 


901 


ll^ll  :*LtH  Ijh  pm  hit  frlHhfiaS  Jel  kite 

I  :ib  h»=hu^  i|h  MS  %  iit  ^(j^felh 


'|V)1I  Wlt»hK?aj»Jhlt>  mtPh  Sk  fr^ESteJ  JikB  tfekt 

I  ShJPPKclMfc  ibj£i  jiE  ^teJA  ftlhlB  ktjjg 


iuii  ihfrjijfc  p^j  p»i*i>  jsiajkiiJtk  hjh 

I  hbWjkiMM  te£te  jfoljnfr  hfrfc-te  imirekja  MSiit  He 


It ^ II  hKlrePJP  Mte  A*  IhPjIM  lbMkt  HUfckk 

I  :hjPjEj  u»hPP>  kijie  Utl^  kjkfeXJ  JJakH  l£*fe 


llhll  :B»lltt>jbJPJHIIt»J  Jfeffii  (PP-i?> l*> HJKlfeteS 
l  :&£|  JsA  feteitHMh  i±  k£  IhPl^hfrft.  & 


a'au  OIASAW  3HA  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


2.  He  from  his  birth  illumined  both  the  firmaments,  he 
became  the  desirable  son  of  the  Father  and  Mother.  The 
ageless  and  inviolable  Fire,  firmly  founded  in  bliss,  with 
his  riches  of  the  Light,  is  the  carrier  of  offering  and  the 
guest  of  the  peoples. 

3.  By  the  will,  in  the  order  and  law  of  a  delivering 
discernment,  the  gods  brought  the  Fire  into  being  by 
their  perceptions  of  the  Knowledge.  In  his  greatness  shin¬ 
ing  forth  with  his  blazing  light  I  invoke  him  as  the  Horse 
so  that  I  may  conquer  the  plenitude. 

4.  To  conquer  the  supreme  bliss  of  the  rapturous  god¬ 
head,  the  undeviating  plenitude  full  of  the  word  of  illumi¬ 
nation,  we  accept  the*  gift  of  the  Flame-Seers,1  the  Fire 
that  aspires,  the  Seer-Will  shining  with  heavenly  light. 


5.  Having  gathered  the  sacred  grass,  stretching  out  the 
ladle  of  offering,  men  have  set  here  in  their  front  the 
Fire  for  the  happiness,  in  his  plenitude  of  inspiration,  the 
Violent,  the  universal  in  godhead,  the  bright  and  beauti¬ 
ful,  one  who  accomplishes  the  seekings  of  sacrifice  of  the 
doers  of  the  works. 

6.  O  Fire,  O  purifying  light,  O  priest  of  the  call,  men 
in  their  sacrifices  having  gathered  the  sacred  grass,  desir¬ 
ing  the  work,  sit  around  thy  house  which  we  must  obtain 
as  ours;  found  for  them  the  Treasure. 


1  or,Jthe  Bhrigus 


107 


801 


llfe&ll  XJXh  Ha  ^p-.to-chPUJ.PIaK  k 

I  :k|hiMt  :klhk±h  Safckkk}  ssfon+tfeip  lfeHiS  :>Hfe£te 


nail  jfcn3  k}  lpn+h*>  i^»  &k  iiivihfeh  :>Hkkk 

I  :kiy  febUlU  taktaj  pikl*jp.K  k 


||o ^ ||  p>h\*>  taHMf.  L%hb  k  kfckj%  kjik  Ikkkj  lk£k  k 
I  t  ujbj^  ppnSh^  k  :klJ|hT*lk  PjhSkj  kJX  llskj 


ll'bll  :Sh|kkJlfr  b£  1  Hblk  kfcit  jplthr'hl,tHt,lklk 

I  tHkkk  lU'ifcjwMfop^PkrAjh  :fckjk  ikJIk  J&k} 


||?ll  :P^j[>?i  PbkmMb^jvifjhkfcj 

I  hopin'  jui  PKrtP?  ikski  ktkkk 


IIGMI  :kijlkk  k  UiikkJX  HlUiii  ijh  kllksie  Jk 

I  kklikie  ikhJ±k|i2  pi^HI^  ikiLkk  |px|>  lie 


anu  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


7.  He  filled  the  two  firmaments,  he  filled  the  vast 
sun-world,  when  he  was  born  and  held  by  the  doers  of  the 
work.  He  is  led  around  for  the  pilgrim  sacrifice,  the 
Seer  founded  in  the  Bliss,  as  the  Horse  for  the  conquest  of 
the  plenitude. 

8.  Bow  down  to  the  giver  of  the  offering,  set  to  his  work 
the  perfect  in  the  pilgrim  rite,  the  knower  of  all  the 
births  who  dwells  in  the  house:  for  he  is  the  all-seeing  cha¬ 
rioteer  of  the  vast  Truth,  the  Fire  has  become  the  priest 
of  the  gods  set  in  front. 

9.  Triple  is  the  fuel  of  the  mighty  and  pervading  Fire 
purified  by  the  aspiring  immortals ;  one  of  three  they  have 
set  in  the  mortal  the  fuel  of  the  enjoyment,  two  have  gone 
to  that  companion  world. 

10.  This  seer  and  lord  of  creatures  human  impulsions 
have  perfected  everywhere  like  an  axe  for  sharpness. 
He  goes  overrunning  the  high  and  the  low  places;  he 
holds  the  child  born  in  these  worlds. 


1 1 .  The  male  of  the  herds  has  been  born  in  different 
wombs  and  he  stirs  abroad  like  a  roaring  lion,  the  uni¬ 
versal  godhead,  the  immortal  wide  in  his  might  bestowing 
the  riches  and  the  ecstasies  on  the  offerer  of  sacrifice. 


12.  Universal  godhead  as  in  the  ancient  days  has 
ascended  glad  by  high  thoughts  to  the  firmament,  to  the 
back  of  heaven,  even  as  of  old  he  creates  the  riches  for 
the  creature  born;  wakeful  he  travels  ever  over  the  same 
field  of  movement. 


alO 


109 


on 


lUll  PhSS  it  IPPB  LfeMbibl  JBhiS  lfe£  %Htpe 

I  bPIh  ft)nt>P.  P*hPJ  )tP>.  (hPj  ^P'lhb.h  hl>PIPtP 


k  'Mt 


H V,  >j  1 1  |h|  Mi  p^jpb  _Pfcj-  MJaSte  b£tj  1±  tei 

i  Uirjh^PtPj  MfeaBJbttfe  hfejm?hpjik  ii£\&  Sih. 


Ilx^ll  PPJIP  IPKP  5k|HP  P&)PJK(P  i£Xj  mbit  mjie 

I  jb&j  Lx  >hjKjt+i>?  it  fe]^ 


Hfeiu  %hab  friPfrjfc  ht}itmj£S  ttlhfefej  B 

l  ki?m  it  lhtoHtKEj  BBJB  HPIPjfe 


33IJ  OIXS.W  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


13.  The  sacrificial  Fire  whose  home  is  in  heaven 
and  who  possesses  the  Truth,  the  illumined  seer  with  his 
utterance  of  the  word  whom  life  that  grows  here  in  the 
mother  has  set  him  with  his  diverse  journeying,  his  tawny 
hair  of  flame  we  desire,  the  deep  thinking  Fire  for  a  new 
and  happy  movement. 

14.  Pure-bright,  rapid  of  impulsion  in  his  journeying, 
Fire  that  looks  upon  the  sun-world,  heaven’s  ray  of 
intuition,  standing  in  the  luminous  planes,  waking  in  the 
Dawn,  Fire,  head  of  heaven,  whom  no  darkness  can 
cover,  him  we  desire  with  obeisance  of  surrender,  the 
Fire  of  the  plenitudes  who  is  the  Vast. 


15.  The  pure  and  rapturous  priest  of  the  call  in  whom 
is  no  duality,  the  dweller  in  the  house,  the  speaker  of  the 
word,  the  all-seeing,  the  visioned  Fire  set  in  the  thinking 
human  being  who  is  like  a  many-hued  chariot  in  his 
embodiment,  him  ever  we  desire  and  his  riches. 


Sukta  3 

1.  For  the  universal  godhead,  wide  in  his  might,  his 
illuminations1  create  the  ecstasies  to  make  a  path  on  the 
foundations  of  things:  because  the  immortal  Fire  sets  the 
gods  to  their  work  none  can  corrupt  the  eternal  Laws. 


1  or,  the  illumined  Ones 


111 


Il^ll  mlti  l>.jj*KJ2ajytem  jj)?(>P->4frX 

I  ibii]  i*]2  (PIP-.p^hjE-.P'  pfchPhHjEfrfaijK. 


nV,||  :fei>  m»j£  MhSi  lnjit  PMjX^jaiajP  iy&  iliifej 
I  kfefejm  Phk->h>PiPi;fc>  Pfe>j£  fe>.gjfe  mjJig-ifc 


U*ll  mjife  (hKJkS  mhPXJK  J££i?J  lie 

I  lupftMt,  &  pwbUjPPikbj  lPP^jhPJ  l>fmiHPh  my 


llfell  <fe£  lie  Plhfrft  fajlPi£.^H4JPS‘>hjpyi  J3jt*hiji2  HJ1XK 

i  :ttjpjiy  many  omm  tefeiy  mmn 


iifc'ii  rSkuotej  yjs&  ijh  mli  ms 

l  :p$J(>K  :mtit  ^pppj  ip^  ^b|  k±£  \p»|>  iPgKPle 


7T>TH  3IXSA.W  3HX  OX  SNTCAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


2.  He  travels  as  the  Messenger  between  earth  and 
heaven,  the  doer  of  works,  man’s  priest  of  the  call,  seated 
within  him,  the  vicar  set  in  his  front;  with  his  light  he 
envelops  the  Vast  Home,  the  Fire  missioned  by  the  gods, 
rich  with  the  Thought. 

3.  Ray  of  intuition  of  their  sacrifices,  effective  means  of 
the  finding  of  knowledge,  the  illumined  seers  greatened  the 
Fire  by  their  awakenings  to  Wisdom;  the  Fire  in  whom 
his  words  have  built  into  a  harmony  his  works,  in  him 
the  doer  of  sacrifice  desires  the  things  of  his  happiness. 

4.  The  Fire  is  the  father  of  sacrifice,  the  Mighty  Lord 
of  the  wise,  he  is  the  measure  and  the  manifestation  of 
knowledge  for  the  priests  of  the  word:  he  enters  into 
earth  and  heaven  with  his  manifold  shape,  many  delight¬ 
ful  things  are  in  him,  he  is  the  seer  who  has  gladness  of  all 
the  planes. 

5.  The  gods  have  set  in  this  world  in  his  beauty  and 
glory  the  delightful  Fire,  with  his  chariot  of  delight, 
luminous  in  the  way  of  his  workings,  the  universal  god¬ 
head,  who  is  seated  in  the  waters,  who  is  the  discoverer 
of  the  sun-world,  who  enters  into  the  depths  and  is  swift 
to  cross  beyond,  who  is  rapt  in  his  mights,  who  bears  in 
himself  all  things. 

6.  The  Fire  with  the  gods  and  creatures  born  builds  by 
the  thought  of  man  the  sacrifice  in  its  many  forms,  he 
moves  between  earth  and  heaven  as  their  charioteer 
bearing  them  to  the  achievement  of  their  desires;  he  is 
the  swift  in  motion  and  he  is  a  dweller  in  the  house  who 
drives  off  every  assailant. 


113 


llUll  <bfrjLlbjEfa±jlPfr) Pfthfrb  ilbhj  Utb 

I  Ifrblhtei  :^IJn>j^P  JbAlbbb  fiilhlbirb 


n°in  mh>  pj>H>jh  iesej  m  ^tie  pjippp.  yakts  tit 

I  la&feb}  jbPbbjbi  :bjb  <£&  itvihih  ^  VMblb 


ll'bll  :jtyafcjte£  lie  hi  htik  hhbb  yabjjhljk  pjlPb  Hit 
I  :fesj±£  IM  IJh  :ini£  :bb  iblbbj 


U?H  bbhjbjis  IPhh  Pijms  £  iib%blis  bb%  llnlltnle 
I  mPhib  t  PKjhlP|b  >|p-b  ibb  :lb  fejbjh&fr  P]h»b] 


\m\  mhfrjfckfi  HjhiHP^i<?jp  bkis  fesi^a  b±isj  pjisb 
l  :b  £jihbj  Ibhjb  bibdbj  mbiblie  blbbi  bills  bile 


3HIJ  OIXSAK  3HX  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


7.  O  Fire,  come  near  to  us  in  a  life  rich  with  offspring, 
nourish  us  with  energy,  illumine  our  impulsions,  animate 
in  us  the  expanding  powers  of  the  Vast,  O  wakeful  flame; 
thou  art  the  aspirant  strong  in  will  for  the  gods  and  the 
illumined  seers. 

8.  Men  ever  with  obeisance,  with  swift  urgings,  give 
expression  for  their  growth,  to  the  knower  of  all  births, 
the  mighty  one,  the  lord  of  the  peoples,  the  Guest,  the 
driver  of  our  thoughts,  the  aspirant  in  those  who  speak 
the  word,  the  wakener  to  consciousness  in  the  pilgrim 
sacrifice. 

9.  Fire,  the  wide-shining  godhead,  joyful  in  his  happy 
chariot,  has  enveloped  in  his  might  our  abodes;1  with 
complete  purification  may  we  obey2  in  the  house  the 
laws  of  work  of  this  giver  of  our  manifold  increase. 

10.  O  universal  godhead,  I  desire  thy  lights3  by  which 
thou  becomest,  O  all-seeing,4  the  knower  of  the  sun- 
world:  born,  thou  hast  filled  the  worlds  and  earth  and 
heaven,  thou  art  there  enveloping  them  all  with  thyself, 
O  Fire. 

1 1.  Fire  the  One  Seer  by  his  seeking  for  perfect  works5 
released  out  of  the  actions6  of  the  universal  godhead, 
the  Vast:  the  Fire  greatening  both  the  parents,  earth 
and  heaven,  was  born  from  a  mighty  seed.7 

1  or,  the  worlds  of  our  habitation; 

2  or,  may  we  approach  with  reverence 

3  or,  seats  or  planes 

4  or,  clear-seeing 

5  or,  by  his  skill  in  works 

c  or,  detached  from  the  actions 

7  or,  the  Fire  was  bom  greatening  both  the  parents,  earth  and  heaven 
with  his  mighty  stream. 


115 


9IT 


ll^ll  Pj>p-  m2  mitK  ipip*  is  a hik}  Ui'Xbb 

I  PPK.t>  PJls  &&}  IP»^S  Udiick  Iftkh  thtt 


llxll  :£jfi  £J  ijlt£i2i  Iklfa  Ife  iis^j 

I  Pjiu>>  iBbiJiS  H]ii±m  ^teatol&K  ^feaXfcllt  Ue 


ll£ll  Plb^h  Uit2p>JtSi2  pip^  B  toiife  Aia^JAjyiii  l£aK 
I  ^U£J2  itfeis  .fthpiP^  PJiliiEJ  & 


Uh.\\  kPilUy  Klhbb^k  ^  MiHPJtt  ^2  Jitt 

I  :t2^E  imy  ynk£  * 


ll^ll  ktX^h  ikJbtfe  h\&B  1M  Kijt  JtiJLfcti£J2  kfe^  kk  lie 
I  Pjl>  PlhS  Ha.Ttlta.ri;  ^-ttv^ta  lk»kfc  PHjiPhJH 

8  'Mt 


3HI3  OIXSAK  3H1  OJ.  SN3VAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


SuKTA  4 

1.  Aflame  and  again  aflame  in  us  awake  with  thy 
truth  of  mind,  with  light  upon  light  grant  us  right  under¬ 
standing  from  the  shining  One.  A  god,  bring  the  gods 
for  the  sacrifice;  right-minded,  a  friend  do  sacrifice  to  the 
friends,  O  Fire. 

2.  O  thou  whom  the  gods,  even  Varuna,  Mitra  and  the 
Fire,  thrice  in  the  day  worship  with  sacrifice  from  day  to 
day,  O  Son  of  the  body,  make  this  sacrifice  of  ours  full 
of  the  sweetness,  so  that  it  may  create  the  native  seat  of 
the  light. 

3.  The  Thought  in  which  are  all  desirable  things  comes 
to  this  first  and  supreme  priest  of  the  call  to  offer  our 
aspirations  as  a  sacrifice,  towards  the  mighty  one  to 
adore  him  with  our  prostrations;  missioned,  strong  to 
sacrifice,  may  he  do  worship  to  the  gods. 

4.  In  the  pilgrim  sacrifice  a  high  path  for  you  both 
has  been  made  which  departs  to  the  high  lustres,  the 
mid- worlds,  the  priest  of  the  call  has  taken  his  seat  in  the 
navel-centre  of  heaven.  We  spread  wide  the  sacred  grass, 
a  space  of  wideness  of  the  gods. 

5.  Accepting  with  the  mind  the  seven  invocations, 
taking  possession  of  all  that  is  by  the  Truth,  they  went 
towards  their  goal.  Many  powers  born  in  the  finding  of 
knowledge  and  wearing  the  forms  of  gods  move  abroad 
to  this  sacrifice. 


117 


81 1 


it  Hu  UiU'frMH  mMie 

I  :ltj^§  bib  :b£  ih^-gj^K-  ^bibbjb  bill  Lb  lie 


iloin  ujmi-.jit'  imi  lbb  PJlPb  l>PLPb  lb$ 

I  Pjihfrft  IPUJU;  riyib^bifeb  MJSb  bSJbbbb 


Hill  :blifeb£  pmi*  lbltibib  ibnhti  :i^b  lbb 

I  ipip  :ii>i»  ppafcp  b£  iPhJblh 


l|?||  Epfrb  *lb-bLtjPPt>.m  lPP4>.b 

I  TUj^hjlwthb^  1S2S  lh\frb  :bj|P>IK  IP.ilR  US 


IIGMI  :iuiim^  ibPfe  bb  billle  b  PbJP>-  bibl£  b3b 
l  P-jbw  n?bb>  :bl±S.h  bib  tesla  lhbb  liibl£  lb=b 


ll^ll  :nj^b  lb  b£  Ibiib  ^bjhi^P'  Ijn.ib  JbbJ  ^b  lbb 
i  h'St.bj  Ibib  pbK^  bb  ■■feihf>  ipup  blbJSdb  lb 


SUM  DIXSAK  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


6.  May  night  and  dawn  differently  formed  in  their 
body  be  joined  close  and  smile  upon  us  in  their  gladness,1 
so  that  Mitra  may  take  pleasure  in  us  and  Varuna  or  with 
his  greatness  Indra  too  with  the  life-gods. 

7.  I  crown  the  two  supreme  Priests  of  the  invocation. 
The  seven  pleasures  take  their  rapture  by  the  self-law 
of  their  nature;  the  Truth  they  express,  the  Truth  only 
they  speak,  guardians  of  the  law  of  its  action  according 
to  that  law  they  shine. 

8.  In  unison  may  Bharati  with  her  Muses  of  invocation, 
Ila  with  gods  and  men,  and  Fire,  Saraswati  with  her 
powers  of  inspiration  come  down  to  us,  the  three  god¬ 
desses  sit  upon  this  seat  of  sacrifice. 

9.  O  divine  maker  of  forms  who  hast  the  utter  rapture, 
cast  upon  us  that  supreme  transcendence  cause  of  our 
growth,  from  which  is  born  in  us  the  hero  ever  active 
with  wise  discernment,  the  seeker  of  the  gods  who  sets  to 
work  the  stone  of  the  wine-pressing. 

10.  O  tree,  release  thy  yield  to  the  gods;  Fire  the 
achiever  of  the  work  speeds  the  offering  on  its  way.  It  is 
he  who  does  worship  as  the  priest  of  the  call,  the  more 
true  in  his  act  because  he  knows  the  birth  of  the  gods. 

1 1 .  Come  down  to  us,  O  Fire,  high-kindled,  in  one 
chariot  with  Indra  and  swiftly  journeying  gods;  let  Aditi, 
mother  of  mighty  sons,  sit  on  the  sacred  grass,  let  the 
gods,  the  immortals,  take  rapture  in  Swdha. 


1  or,  may  they  so  shine  with  their  lights  that  Mitra  may  take  pleasure  in 
us  and  Varuna  and  Indra  with  the  life-gods. 


119 


llVjll  :frqkfrikhmME>  tJXh  Utlb  MJib 

I  l^lh  bb  b&  JhiJ  b&J  iyih 


11*11  AiUilliteh  tStikbiiy  :feitj  UWbi  ^JijB.b3lE 
I  :it>tePl^  yakfe  Lta^  l£l±J  Ighjb  bb  jajbittijK: 


life II  Hik^PH  {tefe  ysfej  MtilbifeiiB  :±^£fc  U? 

I  fcteJJft  bhtj  jltli  lbfeSJy  Mbb^tbipiimie 


II^II  Jbblpjte  lb£  ii  Ibiit-Jesisiii  babfejbS 

I  :fefc£  h->kk  Unir^ii  bb^kijlb 


ll^ll  :fel>Mjb  Uibb  JiiS  bSt-^ttjH  :±Jbb.|  USlhbL 
I  kUiib'fc  Ubbb  :J5bJ 


V»  !£& 


g-au  OIJ.SAW  3HJ.  Ol  SNWAH 


MAN DAL A  THREE 


SUKTA  5 

1.  The  Fire  is  awake  fronting  the  dawns;  one  illumined, 
he  becomes  aware  of  the  paths  of  the  seers:  kindled  into 
a  wide  might  by  the  seekers  of  godhead,  the  upbearing 
flame  opens  the  gates  of  the  Darkness. 

2.  Ever  the  Fire  increases  by  the  lauds,  the  words  of 
those  who  hymn  him  by  their  utterances,  one  to  be 
adored  with  prostrations;  the  Messenger  who  desires 
the  many  seeings  of  the  Truth  has  shone  out  in  the  wide 
flaming  of  the  Dawn. 

3.  The  Fire  has  been  set  in  the  human  peoples,  child 
of  the  Waters,  the  Friend  who  achieves  by  the  Truth; 
luminous,1  a  power  for  sacrifice,  he  has  risen  to  the  sum¬ 
mits;  he  has  become  the  illumined  seer  who  must  be 
called  by  our  thoughts. 

4.  The  Fire  when  he  has  been  kindled  high  becomes 
Mitra,  the  Friend — Mitra  the  priest  of  the  call,  Varuna, 
the  knower  of  the  births,  Mitra,  the  friend,  the  priest 
of  the  pilgrim  sacrifice,  one  rapid  in  his  impulsions,  the 
dweller  in  the  house,  the  friend  of  the  Rivers,  the  friend 
of  the  Mountains. 

5.  He  guards  from  hurt  the  beloved2  summit-seat  of 
the  being,  mighty,  he  guards  the  course3  of  the  Sun; 
Fire  guards  in  the  navel-centre  the  seven-headed  thought, 
sublime,  he  guards  the  ecstasy  of  the  gods. 


1  or,  beloved  and  adorable, 

2  or,  delightful 

3  or,  movement 


121 


SOUTHERN  CALIFORNIA  SCHOOL 
OF  THEOLOGY  LIBIUJtX 


zz\ 


Ho  in  tyn*  P±P  Mt  lfe&jjaih  yh  :t*Lk  lit 

i  Uiuiub.^  jpPBteKmsjtealufelfe  ippjp  i^p+p»*>fr 


u'bii  kte%  titPt  iPi  ]Plssikr>JPlh  IfeJttj 

l  :itahjii  l±tik  fcjls  lii]  khai  iysp  l|*t  itPJP  :k2a  li 


II7II  frihkltb]  :PiJifr>k,P;  IMiUtilk  IPPS  til  hlls 
I  kpi  itit  Pi]ti  lit  tettJttJlbt^e  PIP  (PH 


||e\ll  :p  jiP|j±k£:t£  :<ttlh  rklPli 

I  :Mltc4p-»lthlf>ll>Kh-.h  bibJ>uu.bPftP»jhPj]h  ip 


Hill  kfiktfctPSl  Ikiiijkii  ih  PtPfc  HP  t±PP 
I  kit]  kjlktt  Its  PJlJEifeJ  hik  kit  t£|  stPilkt 


•JMId  OIASAW  HHX  Oi  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


6.  A  skilful  craftsman,  a  god  knowing  all  the  mani¬ 
festations  of  knowledge,  he  forms  the  beautiful  and 
desirable  Name,  the  luminous  seat  of  the  being  in  the 
movement  of  the  peace ;  that  the  Fire  guards,  not  deviating 
from  his  work. 

7.  Desiring  it  as  it  desired  him,  the  Fire  entered  into 
that  luminous  native  abode  wide  in  its  approach;  shining 
forth,  pure,  purifying,  sublime,  again  and  again  he  makes 
new  the  father  and  the  mother. 

8.  Suddenly  born  he  is  carried  by  the  growths  of  the 
earth  when  the  mothers  who  bore  him  make  him  grow 
by  the  light.  The  Fire  in  the  lap  of  the  father  and  the 
mother  is  as  one  who  defends  the  waters  gliding  happily1 
down  a  slope. 

9.  Lauded  by  us  mighty  he  shone  with  his  high  flaming 
in  the  largeness2  of  heaven,  in  the  navel-centre  of  earth. 
The  Fire  is  Mitra  the  friend,  the  desirable  one,  he  is  life 
growing3  in  the  mother;  may  he  as  our  messenger  bring 
the  gods  for  the  sacrifice. 

10.  The  Fire  with  his  high  flaming  up-pillared,  sublime, 
the  firmament  and  became  the  highest  of  the  luminous 
kingdoms,4  when  for  the  flame-seers  life,  that  grows  in 
the  mother,  kindled  all  around  the  carrier  of  the  offerings 
who  was  hidden  in  the  Secrecy. 


1  or,  gliding  brightly 

2  or,  height 

3  or,  life  that  breathes  in  the  mother 

4  or,  highest  of  all  lights 


123 


Ilxll  kfc  nfi-B.b  J&kK  ^KK  ykbk  #*±K 

I  :iaU±nl  kljik  ikmk±SIkkkJ  IK  teK  k±feki  kin 


llfell  :bjh»fcTfe  P<7^»|Pb4frK  Ukdbkkyjkkt  yjjfej  Jkfc 
l  hikfa  ^ht»m  iik^l  k}  ymttejk  Jkfejli  ilk  Jfeiys 


1 1  c  >  I  riStfJU-.^  :b£b  ^  ip^ha-fe  m=jR]h  lk£jk 

1  )hthK  k  hK  lh.fc>J  u  kk  HhtilK  llnhK  Jkyi  IK 


ii  j;  ii  |b.iu?>  Pjha.iK  y±iyik  klteilnKjk 

I  PhU  jja.^!Sb^  lUlkha-b  Ihkfct  y»>.lite  K 


ll^ll  ^bAujkfc  ^  Ik  (ftkklkfe  :Klki 

I  kik  klklkki*  hUfctm  :yc  k|k  k£k£  kihlffii 


31113  Oil, SAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


11.  O  Fire,  achieve  at  my  call  the  Revealing  Speech 
the  many-actioned,  the  lasting  conquest  of  the  Light. 
May  there  be  for  us  a  Son  of  our  begetting  pervading1 
in  his  birth;  O  Fire,  may  there  be  created  in  us  that 
true  thinking  of  thine. 


Sukta  6 

1 .  The  Doers  of  the  work,  seekers  of  godhead,  who  find 
expression  by  the  thought,  lead  it  on  turned  godwards; 
full  of  the  plenitude,  luminous,  carrying  the  Understand¬ 
ing,  it  journeys  moving  forwards,  bringing  the  offering 
to  the  Fire. 

2.  Even  in  thy  birth  thou  hast  filled  earth  and  heaven, 
and  now  thou  hast  exceeded  them,  O  Flame  that  carriest 
on  the  sacrifice;  by  the  greatness  of  earth  and  heaven 
may  thy  seven  tongues  find  utterance,  carriers  of  the  word, 
O  Fire. 

3.  Heaven  and  earth  and  the  lords  of  sacrifice  set 
thee  within  as  the  priest  of  the  call  for  the  house  when 
human  beings,  seeking  godhead,  having  the  delight,  ask 
for  the  resplendent  Ray. 

4.  Mighty,  he  is  seated  steadfast  in  the  world  of  his 
session,  rejoicing  between  the  two  mightinesses  of  earth 
and  heaven,  the  united  wives  of  one  wide  moving  lord, 
ageless  and  inviolate,  the  two  milch-cows  giving  their 
rich  yield  of  milk. 


1  or,  himself  a  begetter 


alt 


125 


921 


ll'bll  Mfrblh  ife  pitk^P^^h 

I  :ib»r£  jbhiy  lb  biiblb  tooi  ktlHjh 


ll?ll  :lb£fc  HHe  ^  ^hjblie  ltibb  jmbMi  b  lb  Hb£ 
i  :ibb  bijH  bbii.  h  ib  ibt]  ibjtH  ftiJbHe  t  lb  ^ 


lie\n  :ib|  b»hPh  hub^ifep-  p>t»?  (hK- 

I  :ib£  bjlH  biJ^ntbl  lb£i  bbU  b±bbb  H 


ll^ll  :>bHb  £jtn.3  llbsbii  klbbbj  bb  klb£  bb  lbK 

I  babj  >Jh*  ipbj^  lbP-jPhPjlh,(W  lUItJite  lb  >»P^ 


llV)ll  hib\infab  hbt  lbb  b^klhbm  JbitiE  \&  lb 
I  b±tb  ll£  |b»l>  ibbfe  bb  bjl£h  (P&t  bilE  b  lbb 


3>U3  OLLSAW  3H.I,  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


5.  Great  art  thou,  O  Fire,  and  great  the  law  of  thy 
workings,  by  thy  will  thou  hast  built  out  earth  and  hea¬ 
ven;  in  thy  very  birth  thou  becamest  the  Messenger,  O 
mighty  lord,  and,  thou  the  leader  of  men  that  see. 


6.  Set  under  the  yoke  with  the  straps  of  the  yoking  the 
two  maned  steeds  of  the  Truth  red  of  hue,  dripping 
Light:  thou,  O  God,  bring  all  the  gods;  O  knower  of  the 
births,  make  perfect  the  ways  of  the  pilgrim  sacrifice. 


7.  From  heaven  itself  thy  lights  blazed  forth,  thou 
shinest  in  the  wake  of  many  outshinings  of  the  Dawn1 
when,  O  Fire,  passionately  burning2  in  the  woods,  the 
gods  set  the  waters3  to  their  work  for  the  rapturous  priest 
of  the  call. 

8.  The  gods  who  take  their  rapture  in  the  wide  mid¬ 
world,  or  those  who  are  in  the  luminous  world  of  heaven, 
or  those  lords  of  sacrifice  who  are  helpful  and  ready  to 
the  call,  them  thy  chariot-horses  have  borne  towards  us. 

9.  Come  down  to  us  with  them  in  one  chariot  or  in 
many  chariots  for  thy  horses  pervade  and  are  every¬ 
where;  according  to  thy  self-law  bring  here  with  their 
wives  the  gods  thirty  and  three  and  give  them  to  drink 
of  the  rapture. 


1  or,  in  the  wake  of  many  wide-shining  Dawns 

2  or,  flaming  as  dawn 

3  apasa  work  would  make  a  clearer  sense;  it  would  then  mean  “set 
in  action  the  work  of  the  rapturous  priest  of  the  call.’' 


127 


nfen  :-o».^KtekS  kzMteiE  lamae  mkaj±  is 

Hiin^v  »i>jhjx  feUD'feJJ&iJiyh  UDmH  U±ij£  aljXliyi  lie 


llhll  --{It.  p]pp  ajifel&jtth  maUK  ajia  IDi  UiM3fe 
I  :^b  ktfek  4bili  liy=&  lD£ie  (jnafe  JDfaD  ^afeJESJ 


nits  &ais  :hit*h\j»  j^iaa  is  a  Day  laajyh 

i  :yiaa  am  :aiyy  Dam  i:mm  jtasaLajiy  :kiie  a  a 

S\  ££& 


11  Uii  jDamajaS  a  la  msmusy  naabS  aim 
1  alii  hiteiapS  aaaaa  :y  aia  asa£  maiei 


II o ^ u  bm  mpmpifr  frfcipite  %ii6  rlisia  D^D.-Jle  miK. 

I  :ykil  DD  ajHDDDD  jalfej  4ftM>,  1DD  l.P^  Ji 


a-au  DIXSAW  3H.T  O.T.  SNHWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


10.  He  is  the  priest  of  the  call  for  whose  growing  even 
wide  earth  and  heaven  speak  the  word  at  sacrifice  on 
sacrifice;  facing  each  other,  fixed  like  two  ends  of  the 
pilgrim-way,  the  Truth  they  keep  in  his  truth  who  from 
the  Truth  was  born. 

11.  O  Fire,  achieve  at  my  call  the  Revealing  Speech 
the  many-actioned,  the  lasting  conquest  of  the  Light. 
May  there  be  for  us  a  Son  of  our  begetting  pervading1 
in  his  birth;  O  Fire,  may  there  be  created  in  us  that  true 
thinking  of  thine. 


Sukta  7 

1.  They  who  have  climbed  from  the  dark-backed 
foundation  have  entered  the  Father  and  Mother,  have 
entered  into  the  seven  voices.  The  Father  and  Mother 
who  dwell  encompassing  all  move  abroad  and  go  for¬ 
ward  to  give  by  sacrifice  long-extended  the  Life. 

2.  He  reached  the  milch-cows  that  dwell  in  heaven, 
the  Mares  of  the  male,  the  divine  rivers  that  carry  in  their 
flow  the  sweetness.  The  one  Light  moves  on  the  way 
around  thee  when  thou  seekest  thy  dwelling  in  the  house 
of  the  Truth. 

3.  On  every  side  he  ascends  them  and  they  become 
easy  to  control,  he  awakes  to  knowledge  and  is  the  lord 
and  discoverer  of  the  riches.  Fire  with  his  blue  back  and 
many  diverse  faces  brings  them  from  the  ever-moving 
foundation  to  a  settled  dwelling. 


1  or,  himself  a  begetter 


129 


0£l 


iiv.ii  kjx  lb  mux  (Ik  H^jpi?j>PMtk(l  ^ 

I  tihihfc  :j2itSi  hifcpj  toatejfeS  fcltkis  |h  (kfalkii 


II7H  ;>Ulho^>  IhPS  Pb  kiliK  k  kk)k3fe  kikl£  k3t 
I  P*pp  lhhb->  :HUfth  kali  b<h'  lUfeK  lilk(l  ika£ 


IICMI  :It  lkk  Ij  bklklkk  ikkte  (JaV&Jtk±Ui  imsits 
I  :%  kh  pljpj  (ktti  fcis)  UiSkJ  kak  :kjm=b  :kJkfe3Jfi 


nk.il  n.bbfojp'  kife  ti  kukfckklfe  .fek  !  US£ 

I  kkli  P^PPPi^lk  (Ik  fc(fc  fclkkJJS  HLtkhJ  (k£ 


uVjll  :(k  Ipljtk  Ihf.1t  ikk  122S  lklkfejl  lkk£  mMkkJ 
I  p.ji„->  ppnt  kiksk  w.pbK  kikik  (loak  kdjkik 


llxll  ‘fehbj  IK  1PM>  frPJlfrh  kikk  :kikBfept]l>iShs 
1  Ptjab  (p!p  kUtkkki  kkt(k±kkjfct2alki  Ijk 


'JUId  0  US' AW  HHJ,  OX  SNWAH 


MAN D ALA  THREE 

4.  The  rivers  energised  and  bear  his  mighty  force  of 
formation  firmly  fixed  and  undecaying;  he  shines  out 
wide  with  his  limbs  in  the  world  of  his  session  and  has 
entered  earth  and  heaven  as  if  they  were  one. 

5.  They  knew  the  bliss  of  the  ruddy-shining  bull  and 
they  rejoice  in  the  rule  of  the  Great  One;  they  are  the 
lights  of  heaven  luminously  blazing  and  the  Word  of 
Revelation  is  their  mighty  common  speech. 

6.  And  great  by  the  knowledge  of  the  great  father  and 
mother  they  led  his  strength  in  the  wake  of  its  proclaiming 
call,  where  the  bull  bears  his  worshipper  round  the  hold 
of  night  towards  its  own  seat. 

7.  Seven  illumined  seers  guard  by  the  five  priests  of 
the  pilgrim-rite  the  beloved1  seat  of  the  being  that  is  set 
within:  moving  forward  the  imperishable  bulls  take  joy; 
the  gods  move  according  to  the  law  of  the  workings  of  the 
gods. 

8.  I  crown  the  two  supreme  Priests  of  the  invocation. 
The  seven  pleasures  take  their  rapture  by  the  self-law  of 
their  nature;  the  Truth  they  express,  the  Truth  only  they 
speak,  guardians  of  the  law  of  its  action  according  to  that 
law  they  shine. 

9.  The  many  Rays  well  governed  in  their  course,  grow 
passionate  for  the  great  Horse,  the  many-hued  Bull.  O 
divine  priest  of  the  call,  rapturous,  awaking  to  knowledge, 
bring  here  the  great  gods  and  earth  and  heaven. 


1  or,  delightful 


131 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  EIRE 


•ismqfrft  nfqq:  g%qq  I 

3cft  farerq  qf^qr  qf-THTT:  f?r  h  *r|  55i?q  n?on 


foSHH#  3^H  nfa  qt:  5I5^Tm  f^RMiq  HT^I 
FUST:  flHfrHtft  fqqTqTS*q  HI  rf  gHfcTHc^I  II?? II 


m  % 

H^THtcsn  qqq|  %q  Hfrfn  3^q  i 

qqt  nTTfi  §qq  gqrfqfa  gqgfcrqqfinT  ii?ii 


^rrtRTHt  qqr  ?g  q?mgqjiqviq:  i 
q  cJH  3f  3Tiq  qqq  fqqqq  q?  Hfvl^mq:  IRII 


3lfq  gci  qqfstqrqq  gqqi  3lfq  i 

qsrifq  qfar  qq?q  anq^  qqt  q^q  srfq  fan:  u^u 


132 


MANDALA  three 


10.  The  swift-running  dawns  have  shone  opulently 
bringing  us  our  satisfactions,  with  their  true  speech,  their 
rays  of  intuition.  And  do  thou,  O  Fire,  by  the  greatness 
of  the  earth  cut  away  for  the  Vast  even  the  sin  that  has 
been  done. 

11.  O  Fire,  achieve  at  my  call  the  Revealing  Speech, 
the  many-actioned,  the  lasting  conquest  of  the  Light. 
May  there  be  for  us  a  Son  of  our  begetting  pervading1 
in  his  birth;  O  Fire,  may  there  be  created  in  us  that  true 
thinking  of  thine. 


Sukta  9 

1 .  Mortals  we  have  chosen  thee,  a  god,  for  our  comrade 
to  protect  us,  the  Child  of  the  Waters,  full  of  happiness 
and  light,  victorious,2  to  whom  no  hurt  can  come. 

2.  When  leaving  the  woods  thou  goest  to  thy  mother 
waters,  that  retreat  turns  not  to  oblivion3  of  thee,  O  Fire, 
for  even  though  thou  art  far  thou  hast  come  into  being 
here. 

3.  When  thou  hast  carried  beyond  the  rough  ground4 
then  hast  thou  truth  of  mind :  some  depart,5  others  remain 
seated  around  thee  in  whose  comradeship  thou  art 
lodged. 


1  or,  himself  a  begetter 

2  or,  strong  to  break  through, 

3  or,  to  thy  destruction, 

4  or.  beyond  thirst 

5  or,  move  forward, 


133 


m 


ll'bll  BibBIRbi  VlBfffrJlle  Hf.fo.>,Ph  k%\K 

I  BBfcBUi  Bb  1B£  BilSBl  hijbpli^B  it  IBIS  lojife 


U?M  BfahB  J2ak  JE£JJlJfcBlS  >frJkP%  hm 

I  iJJi  iJE3ti  IP^UV  1X8 

II6MI  ^Plthjhfrkjtt  :msh  BiBb  11B 

i  BjbSSa&J  BlSfelh  1BB£>  BB  £h  £B 


ll^ll  BSaBJb  IBiife  BB  Jabih  BJihHJK!  IBB  kb  kifeiiy 
I  B^lbbsk  Ib+BB  BlasIsK  JBh  1B2  B 


llV, 1 1  >_jl,  Bfejh  lb 1PM  th  lBSiJBlBiBB  bh 
I  BPBj^eBJ  IbihJbijSIBiB  BBJBiBBB 


11*11  BBfcJ  BBjkiy  IhSlISJK  miXfejB}  BBiBJB^Blfc 
I  .'BBiB  BJilBBilS  Pjhmpbjf 


7!  >1X1  OIXSAI\T  3HX  OX  SNXVAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


4.  When  he  has  passed  beyond  the  forces  that  make  to 
err,  beyond  those  that  cling  perpetual,  the  long-lasting 
who  have  no  hurt  have  followed  and  found  him  like  a 
lion  who  has  taken  refuge  in  the  Waters. 

5.  As  if  one  who  of  himself  has  sped  away  and  utterly 
disappeared,  this  Fire  Life  growing  in  the  mother  led  from 
the  Beyond,  churned  out  on  every  side,  for  the  gods. 


6.  This  is  thou  upon  whom  mortals  have  seized  for  the 
gods,  O  carrier  of  the  offerings,  because  thou  guardest 
all  sacrifices  by  thy  will,  O  Flame  in  man,  O  most  youthful 
god! 

7.  O  Fire,  thy  action  covers  That  Bliss  from  the  igno¬ 
rant  when  the  Animals  sit  together  around  thee,  kindled 
against  the  night. 


8.  Offer  the  oblation  to  the  Fire  intense  with  its  puri¬ 
fying  light,  who  does  perfectly  the  pilgrim-rite,  the  swift 
messenger,  with  his  rapid  pace;  wait  soon  upon  the  ancient 
and  desirable  godhead. 


9.  Gods  three  thousand  and  three  hundred  and  thirty 
and  nine  waited  upon  the  Fire.  They  anointed  him  with 
streams  of  the  clarity,  they  spread  for  him  the  seat  of 
sacrifice,  and  seated  him  within  as  priest  of  the  call. 


135 


8£I 


ilV)li  :£b  JiH  yxL&  I  mhiE  :toi£K 


Mxll  Pbi'S*  i».^  %fe  I  H&sMH  A*&  lilite 


llfell  Irj>p  i&tl  Me  I  :m£  £}£%  £  IbkJbiJK: 


llbll  l^tenhli  Uatejkipe  I  tph9°lfrl,re£  H 


ii^ii  %)*  &  i  afljfrppj  MXte3S<j%j>£  i%liiipe 

a  i 


I  ^*HJP  XUMtUe  IP^hteJ  1HJBJ  1M  P 


non  hm.fc4  :>+P*H>  |h*PlP^  Lfett  I  %i£hh  %£J4^  ^ 


'XHia  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


4.  When  he  has  passed  beyond  the  forces  that  make  to 
err,  beyond  those  that  cling  perpetual,  the  long-lasting 
who  have  no  hurt  have  followed  and  found  him  like  a 
lion  who  has  taken  refuge  in  the  Waters. 

5.  As  if  one  who  of  himself  has  sped  away  and  utterly 
disappeared,  this  Fire  Life  growing  in  the  mother  led  from 
the  Beyond,  churned  out  on  every  side,  for  the  gods. 

6.  This  is  thou  upon  whom  mortals  have  seized  for  the 
gods,  O  carrier  of  the  offerings,  because  thou  guardest 
all  sacrifices  by  thy  will,  O  Flame  in  man,  O  most  youthful 
god! 

7.  O  Fire,  thy  action  covers  That  Bliss  from  the  igno¬ 
rant  when  the  Animals  sit  together  around  thee,  kindled 
against  the  night. 


8.  Offer  the  oblation  to  the  Fire  intense  with  its  puri- 
fying  light,  who  does  perfectly  the  pilgrim-rite,  the  swift 
messenger,  with  his  rapid  pace;  wait  soon  upon  the  ancient 
and  desirable  godhead. 


9.  Gods  three  thousand  and  three  hundred  and  thirty 
and  nine  waited  upon  the  Fire.  They  anointed  him  with 
streams  of  the  clarity,  they  spread  for  him  the  seat  of 
sacrifice,  and  seated  him  within  as  priest  of  the  call. 


135 


IIGMI  kJbiteJi  kj  JJkh  Jkl£  I  i£J2  l§bk£  klk£  ^kate  \3^h  kite 


11^  II  :ktek  kllakjk  kltelk  ik  I  tkakfc  ktite  lkk  J>-kJ  ^k  £±fek  kijte 


tlV>n  %h%  k  kktkj  kjj^fcfs  Ibkj  1  k^k  Iklh  kkiSJkk  k°&  kjl  is 


11*11  ^kabj|kjkl£  kilt  :kkk£te 


IlfellkJkaSk  kife£  £te  kite  Jk  I  kk^klte  ltekjk  kjtelkk  lkk  lk  k 


Ubll  jjk  )=i  Sjkjjk  kzk3k  lfajk  l  .^Klkilki^  kibtekijkateb  Iki 


Hill  >b^k(->  k.teiS  kjkk  fe£  I  klklkkk  teJUTik  :inJaJlkk  kikiki 


STaiJ  OIXSAK  3HX  OX  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


SUKTA  10 

1.  Thee,  O  Fire,  men  who  have  the  thinking  mind 
kindle  in  the  sacrifice,  an  emperor  over  those  who  see, 
mortals  set  alight  a  godhead. 

2.  Thee,  O  Fire,  they  pray  in  the  sacrifices  as  the 
sacrificant  of  the  rite,  the  priest  of  the  call;  shine  out  the 
guardian  of  the  Truth  in  thy  own  home. 

3.  He  who  gives  to  thee  with  the  fuel,  to  the  knower  of 
the  births,  holds  the  hero-energy,  he  ever  grows. 

4.  He  is  the  ray  of  intuition  in  the  sacrifices;  may  he, 
the  Fire,  come  with  the  gods,  anointed  by  the  seven 
priests  of  oblation  to  him  who  holds  the  offerings. 

5.  Bring  forward  for  the  Fire,  for  the  priests  of  the  call, 
the  vast  and  supreme1  word  as  for  the  creator  and  me 
who  brings  the  lights  of  illuminations. 

6.  May  our  words  make  the  Fire  to  grow  when  he  is 
born,  the  Fire  that  carries  the  utterance,  visioned  for  the 
great  plenitude,  for  the  treasure. 

7.  O  Fire,  most  strong  to  sacrifice  in  the  pilgrim-rite, 
worship  the  gods  for  the  seeker  of  the  godhead;  as  the 
rapturous  priest  of  the  call  thou  shinest  wide,  beyond  the 
forces  that  make  us  err. 


1  or,  ancient  word 


I 


137 


861 


HVjii  :j=b  JLkk  :fel  .UfLt;  1 


ip>i>K  rfeAJLfete 


n x n  PEn'Stt  ms  Mjfe  i  Wkt^Pite  m£k  k&skk  k&  ktjte 


llfell  if»J>P  Jtkti  fete  I  :&2fe  klk%  k  Jfefejktjte 


nhll  lyfenkk  lfefejkijte  I  :P^jiPP-tP^>itj^  fr>h9°lfete£  k 


II  ^  II  khMhkh  k  I  :iajfekfej  Jtkifeasy%i£  ik^ktjte 


a  u& 


ll'bll  kfefe^k  tkkkilfefe^  I  ^feikjk  :klfeUite  IfrttthfeJ  lisfej  ifei  k 


I  7\\  hP>fe>  :kkk£  JfeAkkk  Ifefe  l  kfeysfi  jtikkis  ifefelh  :k  k 


OIXSAlAi  3H.L  0.1.  S'MWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


8.  So,  do  thou,  O  purifying  Flame,  kindle  in  us  the 
luminous  hero-energy,  to  those  who  laud  thee  become 
most  close  for  their  weal. 

9.  This  is  thou  whom  the  illumined  seers  who  have  the 
light,  ever  wakeful,  kindle,  the  immortal  bearer  of  the 
offering,  increaser  of  our  force. 


Sukta  1 1 

1.  Fire  is  our  all-seeing  priest  of  the  call,  our  vicar  set 
in  front  in  the  pilgrim-rite;  he  knows  the  uninterrupted 
course  of  the  sacrifice. 

2.  He  is  the  immortal,  the  carrier  of  the  offering,  the 
aspirant,  the  messenger  settled  in  the  rapture;  the  Fire 
joins  with  our  Thought. 

3.  Agni  wakes  to  knowledge  companioning  our 
Thought,  he  is  the  supreme1  ray  of  intuition  in  the  sacri¬ 
fice;  it  is  he  who  crosses  through  to  man’s  goal. 

4.  Fire,  the  Son  of  Force,  who  hears  the  things  that  are 
eternal,2  knower  of  the  births,  the  gods  created  as  a 
carrier  flame. 

5.  The  inviolable  who  goes  in  front  of  the  human 
peoples  the  Fire  is  a  swift  chariot  that  is  ever  new. 


1  or,  ancient 

2  or.  who  has  the  inspired  knowledge  of  things  eternal. 


139 


iixii  yiii-SiS  i 


>■>!*]>>  %1  ilDcl^k  115W 


IlfeU  wipk+p  £fcij±^te  1H  l  to*  toi*n  liSafeJJfe 

Ub.ll  k&  j+HJPih  li2Jte  I  :W>%  4J£ii  Us£  yiilSiS 

ii  ^  u  iPhjhfej  pih  nite  i  jbfefcjjxt  tiS  tiii  ns  y±iiSdS 

hi  && 

11^,11  lil^  %>  I  |kliakjte  tetelfe.  iitte  fciK 

H71I  rPSbPIU'  (mKfeJ  I  IKJitifct  hlHSiHiSlUfejIi  ijh 

II6MI  :tabj^*blh  Hte  I  :Hil±  iyy±ite  ite£l£  Ui£l£  fejifi 

H^ll  •uu»bk.b)t^P>jK>  I  rPfehMPIfrsfbi  :t£sHttpE  IfeSfeJ  HlMlB 


3*11.4  OUSAK  3HJ.  0.1.  SMJ-VAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


6.  Overpowering  all  assailants  the  Fire  is  the  will  of 
the  gods  never  crushed,  filled  with  the  multitude  of  his 
inspirations. 

7.  By  this  bringer  of  delights  the  mortal  who  gives, 
reaches  and  possesses  the  house  of  the  purifying  light. 

8.  May  we  by  our  thought  possess  around  us  well-estab¬ 
lished  all  the  things  of  the  Fire,  may  we  be  illumined 
seers  who  know  all  things  born.1 

9.  O  Fire,  we  shall  win  all  desirable  things  in  thy 
plenitudes,  in  thee  have  moved  towards  us  the  gods. 


Sukta  12 

1.  O  Indra,  O  Fire,  come  to  the  offering  of  the  wine, — 
by  our  words  your  supreme  desirable  ether;  drink  of  it 
you  who  are  missioned  by  the  Thought. 

2.  O  Indra,  O  Fire,  the  conscious  sacrifice  journeys 
taking  with  it  the  worshipper:  by  this  word  drink  of  this 
offered  wine. 

3.  I  choose  by  the  swift  impulse  of  the  sacrifice  Indra 
and  the  Fire  whose  pleasure  is  in  the  seer;  take  here 
your  content  of  the  Soma  wine. 

4.  The  smiters,  the  slayers  of  the  coverer  I  call,  the 
unvanquished,  the  companions  in  victory,  Indra  and 
the  Fire,  most  strong  to  win  the  plenitudes. 


1  or,  in  whom  knowledge  is  born. 


al2 


141 


1  U»b-P  i%£  M12  IMP'te 


Hill  kidi  liljt  tSal^to  (it  &  kill 

I  H^E-bgaSjfe  ftWIhlEfr  IS 

kl  m 

\\\[\  kfrya  IS  lfe  I  :fekk  htelte  i}h  :H£J  lhp(>.  jkilfeft 
U?ll  bfe-»>|t>h  i  fe  jtijiiiti  fcjuafeli  ife  injllabj^  ll±iL2±i 

II6HI  k&  Utah  iritPlfe  1  iHl^te  H±}fc  IS  hkhitthte  (fatll?^ 

Il^ll  llnhfr  I  hPPh>|P^hm??  PjPP  y±tl£±£ 

nv,Hkfe  lie  Jail  ifeafltS  i  :>ip>jp  ^.bjn^Phife  is 


•raid  OLLSAW  3 HI  Ol  SMIAIAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


5.  Your  adorers,  speakers  of  the  word,  they  who 
know  the  ways  of  the  guidance  hymn  you:  O  Indra,  O 
Fire,  I  accept  your  impulsions. 

6.  Indra  and  Fire  shook  down  the  ninety  cities  possessed 
by  the  destroyers,  together  by  one  deed. 

7.  O  Indra,  O  Fire,  all  around  our  work  our  thoughts 
go  forward  towards  you  along  the  paths  of  the  Truth. 

8.  O  Indra,  O  Fire,  your  mights  are  companions  and 
your  delights;  in  you  is  founded  all  swiftness  in  the  work. 

9.  O  Indra,  O  Fire,  you  encompass  the  luminous  king¬ 
dom  of  heaven  in  the  plenitudes;  it  is  your  strength 
that  is  manifested  there.1 


Sukta  13 

1.  Sing  out  some  mightiest  hymn  to  this  divine  Fire; 
may  he  come  to  us  with  the  gods  and,  strong  to  sacri¬ 
fice,  sit  upon  the  sacred  grass. 

2.  He  is  the  possessor  of  the  Truth  to  whom  belong  earth 
and  heaven  and  their  guardings  accompany  his  mind 
of  discernment;  for  him  the  givers  of  the  oblation  pray, 
for  him  for  their  protection  when  they  would  win  the 
riches. 


1  or,  that  is  your  strength  which  wakes  to  knowledge. 


143 


m 


llfell  biivt?  IK  toh  iiiJiJ  bj  IblbJ  ASJb  be  i2bj 

I  :bilb  |^P^  jT»fc->blPtfc  te->bP-  Pfr^hP  ^  hjlbie 


II ^11  kbste  |fr>h  lhabjh  -Ife^PJIIt  IkiJK  |pfob£b  :fcsSkbJ 

l  :ib%  b  :wppj*  kibahdfrbbj  Ifrh  Iblk  lie 

e>l  km 


l|€MI  hPmjhPPPohlb  h^k  btbbfe 

I  6b  khssyli  PP*|P  pp^p  bill  lb  b 


ll^ll  :ppip^p  btslbkb  ife^S  :b  IS 
I  :wpgp^  bhtb  hPJKlkE  lb  b£ 


l|V)ll  WntPj  PjhtPj  >IP(£  jby.hJP^K  ljfllbb3b 

I  :bjbjlh  MibJlbib  fr4hmpftj|ft 

llxll  lbibe  Ibtbjm  bjbj  6b  bbkatt  :b  Jbb 

|  IPPlfc  Efta-hPjchP^b  InJ^PIft  :b  b 

llkll  kbh  ippjp  lb  lblb  pppp?  lb  b  bt|K 
I  :b  %  Ibblblbb  b  Jbb  bbj  bbb  b 


3313  OIXSAJV  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


3.  He  is  the  illumined  seer  and  regent  of  these  sacri¬ 
fices,  he  and  always  he ;  that  Fire  set  to  his  work  who  shall 
win  and  give  the  plenitude. 

4.  May  he,  the  Fire,  give  us  all  happy  peace  for 
our  journeying  there  whence  are  rained  the  riches  in 
heaven,  from  all  the  planes,  in  the  Waters. 

5.  Men  who  have  the  light  kindle  into  his  flaming, 
incomparable,  by  the  opulent  thinkings  of  this  being  Fire, 
the  priest  of  the  call,  the  lord  of  all  the  peoples. 

6.  Do  thou,  strong  to  call  the  gods,  protect  us  in  the 
Word,  in  all  our  utterances;  increasing  the  life-powers 
powerful  to  win  the  thousands.  Flame  out  blissfully  for 
us,  O  Fire. 

7.  Now  give  us  a  thousandfold  riches  bringing  the 
Son,  bringing  our  growth,  luminous,  a  hero-strength, 
abundant,  inexhaustible. 


Sukta  14 

1.  The  rapturous  priest  of  the  call  has  reached  the 
things  of  knowledge;  he  is  the  true,  doer  of  sacrifice,  a 
great  seer,  a  creator.  Fire  the  son  of  force,  with  his 
chariot  of  lightning  and  his  hair  of  flaming  light  has 
attained  to  a  massive  strength  on  the  earth. 

2.  I  come  to  thee,  accept  my  word  of  obeisance,  O 
master  of  Truth  and  strength,  to  thee  who  givcst  know¬ 
ledge.  As  the  knower,  bring  those  who  know  and  sit  in 
the  midst  on  the  sacred  grass,  O  lord  of  sacrifice. 


145 


l  :i^hK  jbiei  |b2j  frlhlb  lyiH^  lbbh  lmtlh  bj 

V»*  £& 


II6MI  bitle  ^»».p  btt  bjjb  bibiS  bibibj  bi 

I  >♦»>?  ^baie  (b^bb  b|  ih^blb  iPtibpfe  ttb  b-t£ 


ll^ll  ph*m  Ibbb  Inh^slb  bp.  ^  & 

|  •llt'lb  bj  |i>0  ►*!»►?  btbftjbS  bj  b£  £^bi 


Iiv>u  bile  ysbj  lbhpbib^  lfejb  ibbb  b2a*Jb 

i  tauh^bb  i^H^ithbb  ^  upp  aie  ^  bb 


„*„  bb  bbbb  :irn}  bjle  ibabj  b£ib£b  lbbJ*Sbfi 

I  i.bku^  :bkh  :b^b  b*£  b£bbj 


llfell  bppbib  bibib  Libjbj£  ba£  bipslUb  bb 
1  pa.~i-njih>h  b>Ptb  bile  ^l-mib  lbbb  b  Jbb£ 


g^IJ  OIISAP'I  3HJL  OX  S.MIVAH 


MAndaLa  three 


3.  Let  dawn  and  night  full  of  their  plenitude  come 
running  towards  thee  on  paths  of  the  wind,  O  Fire,  when 
all  around  they  anoint  with  oblation  thee  the  first  and 
supreme,  as  if  two  sides  of  a  chariot-front  they  enter  into 
the  gated  house. 

4.  To  thee,  O  Forceful  Fire,  Mitra  and  Varuna  and  all 
the  life-powers  chant  a  hymn  of  bliss,  when  with  thy 
flame  of  light,  O  son  of  Force,  thou  standest  as  the  sun 
above  the  peoples  shining  wide  upon  men. 

5.  Today  we  give  to  thee  thy  desire,  approaching  thee 
with  outstretched  hands  and  with  obeisance j  worship  the 
gods  with  a  mind  strong  for  sacrifice,  an  illumined  seer, 
with  thy  unerring  thought,  O  Fire. 

6.  For,  from  thee,  O  son  of  Force,  go  forth  the  many 
protections  of  the  godhead,  and  his  plenitudes.  Do  thou 
give  us  the  thousandfold  treasure,  give  by  the  word  that 
betrays  not  the  truth,  O  Fire. 

7.  O  understanding  mind,  O  seer- will!  now  that  all 
these  things  we  who  are  mortals  have  done  for  thee, 
O  god,  in  the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  do  thou  awake  to  the 
whole  well-charioted  action  and  taste  all  That  here,  O 
immortal  Fire. 


Sukta  15 

1.  Flaming  out  in  a  wide  mass  of  strength  press  back 
the  hostile  powers  that  hurt  and  afflict.  May  I  abide  in 
the  bliss  of  the  all-blissful  Vast,  in  the  leading  of  the 
Fire  who  is  swift  to  our  call. 


147 


ii6\ii  ^  jhktahS  :jaoj2=i 

I  fern  :yt  k^i  kki£  kUDJES 


ll^ll  B12a  >Jh  :PJH?  k>Pk  Ik  lit  |Htv*  lk&£  kkKJ%£ 
I  :fc  k2  p>pi^ip  k±l£j  itkk  kh\i»  £ 


llViii  tfc^'5  :k  Ikiji  ki  u»kifti>»  ifcjk  itjii±±jii  k  Jfti 
I  :lk^£  :kliyk  lfiaJte  lk£  Inj^tE  :Hips  kl£  tffiajte 


llxll  ^JokS  :k£k  ^k^k^klh  kikhk  lkk  ki»£k 
I  uib^uj^  ikt+jk  :ibtbj  Jitkk  kite  t^Elkte 


llfcll  sakjk  ItetejR  kli  <k  :£kilk  kjh  fe  kjk  <kfc 
I  IjLh  kj  Jkkte  P>fr->iin*i$  :ikS  ktttkk  ltekk  ki 


llhll  pi^  lk±k  kite  ^  kkk  tkkj  kjiite 

I  :U4k  fcjjk  £&J£  1&  ki  \2ak2  (kkk  Ikite  Ik  ki 


3>IXI  DI  AS  AN  3 HA  OX  SMNAH 


*  MANDALA  THREE 

2.  Thou  in  the  dawning  of  this  dawn,  thou  when  the 
Sun  has  arisen  wake  for  us  and  be  our  protector.  Take 
pleasure  in  the  Son  as  if  in  an  eternal  birth.  Accept  my 
affirmation  of  thee,  O  Fire,  perfectly  born  in  thy  body. 

3.  Thou  art  the  male  with  the  divine  vision,  in  the  wake 
of  many  dawns  shine  out  luminous  in  the  black  nights,  O 
Fire.  O  prince  of  the  riches,  lead  and  carry  us  over  beyond 
the  evil;  O  youthful  god,  make  us  aspirants  for  the 
treasure. 

4.  Shine  out,  O  Fire,  the  invincible  male,  conquering  all 
the  cities,  all  the  felicities;  thou  art  the  knower  of  the 
births,  O  perfect  guide  on  the  way,  thou  art  the  leader 
of  the  first,  the  Vast  all-protecting  sacrifice. 

5.  O  Fire  of  worship,  towards  homes  of  bliss  many  and 
without  a  gap,  towards  the  gods  shining  out  wise  in  under¬ 
standing,  like  a  conquering  chariot  bring  the  plenitude; 
O  Fire,  do  thou  make  earth  and  heaven  firmly  established 
for  us. 

6.  O  Bull  of  the  herds,  nourish  us,  move  towards  us 
with  plenitudes,  make  heaven  and  earth  good  milk-cows 
for  us,  O  Fire;  O  god,  come  with  the  gods  glowing  in  the 
beauty  of  thy  splendour.  Let  not  the  evil  mind  of  mortal 
besiege  us. 

7.  O  Fire,  achieve  at  my  call  the  Revealing  Speech  the 
many-actioned,  the  lasting  conquest  of  the  Light.  May 
there  be  for  us  a  Son  of  our  begetting1  pervading  in  his 
birth;  O  Fire,  may  there  be  created  in  us  that  true 
thinking  of  thine. 

1  or,  himself  a  begetter 


149 


Il^ll  P-nabjfc  ipp^hp  uk  uibR  iki>  a 

I  <X=3ie  Jk&e  kiSjkfelfrK  uh6  ^uMta  ht^lS 


ll^ll  fcj£  JJ2±lk|  hs^kj  Ik  klkjklk 

I  :ki^  klP.>(fclk  hPh.skke  <k  1k 


llxll  kiinp  kk  kis  lie  ue  ppp  hip^  ke 

I  :i=]>  kjlkjek  ikikj  ^Ekjfc 


llfell  :inkajli  trtb^PPSjPPiP'K  P4oahjb  u-papjS 
i  latakB  kks  rnlik  ii^iaisj  :nii  &  a 


llhll  tkklkkia  i$ip*pj  (frg>S  filPPh  kijii  k  kjie 
I  :Plkblt  :j2ii  PP->jh  kk  IPP-tP  :Pi>P  |>P  HS 


11  ^ II  klklhlkfe  ls|  PP^it  >?->KPhP->  tcs  hi> 
I  kikklk  :ik  ljk)h(pfi  :bijkkte 


g-au  OI.LSAK  3H1  OX  SMNAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


SUKTA  16 


1.  This  is  the  Fire  that  is  lord  of  the  hero-energy  and 
the  great  felicity,  lord  of  the  wealth  of  the  shining  herds, 
and  of  good  progeny  who  has  power  for  the  slaying  of  the 
coverers. 

2.  O  god,  O  life-powers,  you  cleave  to  this  Fire  of 
increase,  in  whom  are  the  treasures  that  make  our  happi¬ 
ness  to  grow.  Through  all  the  days  they  have  destroyed  the 
enemies,  the  evil-thoughted  who  attack  us  in  our  battles. 

3.  So  do  thou,  O  bounteous  Fire,  with  thy  many  lights 
bestow  on  us  the  greatest  and  griefless  wealth,  full  of 
the  hero-strength,  of  progeny  and  of  force. 

4.  He  who  puts  forth  his  force  and  is  the  doer  in  all 
the  worlds,  he  who  is  the  doer  of  works  in  the  gods, 
labours  in  the  gods  and  in  all  mights  and  in  the  self- 
expression  of  men. 

5.  O  Fire,  deliver  us  not  to  unconsciousness,  nor  to  the 
lack  of  the  strength  of  the  hero,  nor  to  the  absence  of  the 
Light1,  nor  to  the  bondage2,  O  son  of  force,  put  away 
from  us  the  hostile  powers. 

6.  O  felicitous  Fire,  have  power  in  the  pilgrim-rite  for 
the  fruitful  plenitude,  for  the  Vast;  O  thou  of  the  many 
lights,  join  us  to  the  large  and  glorious  riches  that  create 
the  Bliss. 


1  literally,  “the  Cow” 

2  or,  to  the  Censurer 


151 


IUII  ktt.Uk  fckkkkka&s  )J=X  plPP°£  Pj>hP$  1 lk 

|  :>PPI|r  P,gfr>->HIP*kP  |P-*ln?>  itsR  p^g  kijk 


llfcll  :jb  Ji  hlklhPfr  kh  lkkUSk}  kjk  (bhiPibbkjiP 
I  kke  JkkMJkiklie  k>p->p^PHiN  kk  tajPiP^k 


ll^H  JSkkikJ  JS  kb  kfeakk  pip^  kjk  ippjS  ppip^ 
I  k)p^jpt;j,j»^p|p  jkkj  ikk  lh»bjh  Ptkfc(£  ^pipp 


ill  PIP^  PlPP'PPtjlg  (pp6  :<PPIh  ^InjPjPft  jjfc^apj^li: 
I  :>!PPtPJ  kMiitjSkkk  lk.b  PlkPK  :PihPohjk 


C\'i  ttli 


3HIX  OIXSAPi  71 HX  OX  SA’PJAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


SUKTA  1 7 

1.  He  is  kindled  and  blazes  out  according  to  the  first 
and  supreme  laws  and  is  united  with  the  Rays,  he  in  whom 
are  all  desirable  things,  Fire  with  his  tresses  of  flame  and  his 
raiment  of  light,  the  purifier,  perfect  in  sacrifice,  for 
sacrifice  to  the  gods. 


2.  O  Fire,  as  thou  hast  accomplished  in  sacrifice  thy 
priesthood  for  the  earth,  awaking  to  knowledge,  O  knower 
of  the  births,  as  thou  hast  accomplished  it  for  heaven1, 
so  with  this  oblation  do  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  carry  yet 
further  beyond  the  sacrifice  with  the  human  being 
today. 

3.  Three  are  thy  lives,  O  knower  of  all  things  born,  three 
are  the  dawns  that  are  thy  births,2 3  O  Fire;  by  them  win 
through  sacrifice  the  protection  of  the  gods,  thou  as  the 
knower  become  for  the  doer  of  sacrifice  the  peace  and 
the  movement. 

4.  We  hymn  thee  by  our  words,  O  knower  of  all  things 
born,  as  the  Fire  perfect  in  light,  perfect  in  vision,  the 
object  of  our  prayer  and  offer  to  thee  our  obeisance;  thee 
the  gods  made  the  Messenger,  the  Traveller,  the  carrier 
of  offerings,  the  navel  centre  of  Immortality. 


1  or,  as  thou  hast  offered  in  sacrifice  the  oblation  of  the  earth,  as  thou  hast 

offered  the  oblation  of  heaven. 

3  or,  that  gave  thee  birth,  O  Fire; 


153 


11*11  :bbl  ijJtt  mb  y  lh4tfcHfc  IS  JafebJlbSbJ  bi£b^ 
I  %b  hUimtli;  :nk  bib  Lbbi  pfofrjb  mbJJSbb 


llfell  JttlMii  biw^PHi  bbj  mi  blhftm  miib  JiiSkLb 
i  m  &&  jam  mi  tym  mmimi  mmysi 


u^n  mime  i^uip^pj  y  bj  tmbjie  ihp^j  ym  ym 
i  >>»h  ^smmis  urn  bmmjie  mmie  mm  ym 


ii^ii  •(ui^iP^mmK  bjjs  mum  yumj  %  yilh£ 
i  :km  i»^w>hj  mm  mis  ysyb  mu&  mie  yt  um 


?'c  ££& 


nVjii  mu  m  yt  msym%bj  mm  k  mb  mrnsb 

I  :iU£  b  lbbbi  lbm  b  iPiJ  bl ftyp'fr  bile  lbfi  IbySmib 


H>I1J  DIJLSAW  3HJ.  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


5.  O  Fire,  he  who  was  before  thee  and  was  the  priest 
of  the  call  and  mighty  for  sacrifice  and  was  dual  entity  and 
by  the  law  of  his  nature  the  creator  of  the  Bliss,  by  his 
law  of  action  carry  on  the  sacrifice,  thou  who  art  awake 
to  knowledge,  thou  establish  our  pilgrim-rite  in  the 
advent  of  the  gods. 


Sukta  1 8 

1.  O  Fire,  in  our  coming  to  thee  become  right-minded 
accomplishing  our  aim  as  a  friend  to  a  friend,  as  father 
and  mother  to  their  child;  for  these  worlds  of  beings 
born  are  full  of  harm:  burn  to  ashes  the  hostile  forces 
that  come  against  us. 

2.  Wholly  consume  our  inner  foes,  consume  the  self- 
expression  of  the  enemy  who  would  war  against  us,  O 
lord  of  the  riches,  consume,  conscious  in  knowledge,  the 
powers  of  ignorance;  let  them  range  wide  thy  ageless 
marching  fires. 

3.  I  desire  and  offer  the  oblation,  O  Fire,  with  the  fuel, 
with  the  pouring  of  the  clarity,  for  speed,  for  strength. 
Until  I  have  the  mastery,1  adoring  with  the  Word  I  lift 
to  thee  for  the  conquest  of  the  hundreds  this  thought 
divine. 

4.  Affirmed  by  our  lauds  rise  up  with  thy  flame  of  light, 
O  son  of  force,  found  the  vast  expansion  in  us  who  labour 
at  the  work,  found  opulently  in  the  Vishwamitras  the 
peace  and  the  movement,  O  Fire.  We  make  bright  many 
times  over  thy  body. 


1  or,  as  long  as  I  have  the  power, 


155 


9SI 


llxll  frjifrft  MAJ  iRli  2atyjj  kt  Jis  Ja 

I  :itLbi£  UstHit  kiSlifeydffi  ^  %  toJJXK 


II ^ II  £  itlMt  ^JitUS  Mkkt;  mia  kite 

i  :^iy  isii)  ii£  t^a  mat  mh^%  & 


whw  it  ikiiiikjiki^  kjajtyxts 

i  pjpipft  jaytx  laMt  ift*foirhj(Ph'a>?j£  ate  ^  is 


Win  ujmn  a±k  JttUSite  Mi  kmteJi  IPIPt^  ktSX  m  H 

i  ukkpsbjbspj  fepfe  alt  isay  Uii  js  xmii  a^te 


\t\  j£B 


nY)it  typ  ay*  ip-»*  urn  km.  mat£  kyipjm 
i  :kttja  P  tyat  a  !HKj?.PhjaE‘  Mi  tap 


3HI3  0I1S AIM  3 HI  OX  SNJ\AH 


MANDALA  THREE 


5.  O  conqueror  of  the  riches,  create  for  us  the  ecstasy, 
such  thou  becomest  when  thou  art  high  kindled.  Opu¬ 
lently  in  the  gated  house  of  thy  felicitous  adorer  thou 
upholdest  thy  gliding  bodies  streaming  their  radiance. 


Sukta  19 

1.  Fire  I  choose  the  priest  of  the  call  in  the  sacrifice, 
the  wise,  the  seer,  the  omniscient,  free  from  ignorance: 
he  shall  do  worship  for  us  strong  for  sacrifice,  in  the 
formation  of  the  godheads;  for  the  wealth,  for  the  plenitude 
he  wins  all  kinds  of  amassings. 

2.  O  Fire,  I  mission  towards  thee  a  power  of  giving 
bearing  my  oblation,  luminous,  full  of  lustres.  May 
he  come  to  the  sacrifice  with  his  givings,  with  his  treasures 
turning  round  it  and  widening  the  formation  of  the  god¬ 
heads. 

3.  So,  am  I  guarded  by  thee  with  a  mind  of  shining 
energy;  then  do  thou  teach  us  of  the  riches  that  teach 
and  that  give  us  good  children  of  our  works.  O  Fire, 
may  we  become  afiirmers  of  thee  by  our  lauds  and 
rich  in  the  power  of  a  wealth  most  full  of  the  strength 
of  the  gods. 

4.  For,  many  flame-forces  they  have  founded  in  thee, 
O  Fire,  men  who  have  the  will  to  sacrifice  to  the  god¬ 
head.  So,  bring  to  us  the  formation  of  the  godhead,  O 
youthful  god,  when  thou  worshippest  with  sacrifice 
the  divine  host  today. 


a 13 


157 


851 


11*11  HP^lnl  l&fcjl  PJI&SPJ  kfcb  JUikii  li&fe  J± 

I  IbIPTfc  lh£>-  1S±L&|  ith  IP-hbrJK: 


II fell  ^ifesah  UE&  %i  JfeifctJJfefefeJ  li±bjih  ibm  mil? 

I  JaLb  Mbkyalfefei  |£%bll£  i>b  JaJJiit  biJte 


Hill  bSikite  JiliJ  ^Jih  :feltjlP-MKlfefe%  ^  .£  £  ibbj 
I  :y=£  piu-pt*  jJLfeJ  Bai££%  ifei&Ja  ys.  lbiyJk  H  \£  biie 


mil  Ofaimp  iJS3JE  pamii  :JX^  Llsalfe  :k  IftPJIj^fi 
I  :fei=k^Jb  ft2ajte  l&teji-  lJd£iJhJbtlaiti±tpe 


°C  ifc& 


11^11  fcbliib  HJJfelSs  EjtB(E  IbfeJSbile  (t  K  B 

i  .mi  Jiltelaia  mtL&UHiJ  btoki  kiJdkilb^  ltb  hit 


•J-aiJ  OIASAIV  3 HI.  O.L  SNJAIAH 


MANDAT -A  THRE 


5.  Since  the  gods  seating  thee  for  sacrifice  have  anointed 
thee  as  priest  of  the  call  in  the  rite,  so  do  thou,  O  Fire, 
awake  here  as  our  protector  and  found  thy  inspirations 
in  our  bodies. 


Sukta  20 

1.  Fire  and  dawn  and  the  two  riders  of  the  horse 
and  Dadhikravan  the  Carrier  of  the  offerings  calls  by  his 
words  in  the  dawnings.  May  the  gods  full  of  the  Light 
hear  us;  may  they  desire  and  accept  with  a  common 
pleasure  our  sacrifice. 

2.  O  Fire,  three  are  thy  steeds,  three  the  worlds  of  thy 
session;  three  are  thy  tongues,  O  thou  born  from  the  Truth, 
they  are  many:  three  too  are  thy  bodies  desired  by  the 
gods,  with  them  protect  undeviatingly  our  words. 

3.  Many  are  the  names  of  thee,  the  Immortal,  O  Fire, 
O  knower  of  the  births,  O  god  who  bearest  with  thee  the 
self-law  of  nature;  all  the  manifold  magic  of  the  Lords  of 
magic  they  have  combined  in  thee,  O  all-ruler,  O  builder 
of  the  levels. 

4.  The  Fire  is  as  the  Enjoyer  the  leader  of  the  divine 
worlds,  he  is  the  divine  guardian  of  the  fixed  time  of 
things,  and  with  him  is  the  Truth.  He  is  the  slayer  of 
the  Coverer,  the  Eternal,  the  omniscient;  may  he  carry 
one  who  hymns  him  with  the  word  beyond  all  the  diffi¬ 
culty  and  stumbling. 


159 


091 


uV)ti  kk  iyjs  i?jis  jutya  ^  jg  ksjky-ts 

i  |kiss  bfe  £  is  kKka  £y  yitek  £  aatejys 


11*11  >-teJJa  feibk  U22I  liilfakh  U&6  mistyite 
I  h4Pt^  fciJK  |J±JL*4pi  :kyaJ£  tol 


llfell  .ak  lbbJJii  frAPb  %tokjk  :£ate  :J3pfe 

I  bIKPJ  P>c|PE.fcPh  ,i2A§ 


Hill  kklb  %f-  b±  .Safe  frPifcfri-  khh££ 
I  :iiJah  PPP^t  :i*(Q»  y  iteJalb  :±kbkk 

lU II  £}ibj  ytbb  kbJais  :J^  irika  m%  WKIHifeyb; 

I  iha£  Ihj&fc  la^bUJ^b  ya  kl 


Ic.  k±& 


UVjll  ^1  k£  lbi^lte  ISk  k&2  ja=  bJtt  bnitfelkkl  IkfeSJlfi 
I  k&£  k  ViPfcjtt  kltkik  k  kkbbtJkLbiyi: 

I 


3>IIi  OIXSAJM  3IXL  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


5.  Dadhikravan,  I  call  here,  and  the  Fire,  and  the 
divine  dawn,  Brihaspati  and  the  god  Savitri,  the  two  riders 
of  the  horse,  and  Mitra  and  Varuna  and  Bhaga,  the  Vasus, 
the  Rudras,  the  Adityas. 


Sukta  21 

1.  Found  this  our  sacrifice  in  the  immortals,  accept 
these  offerings,  O  knower  of  things  born.  O  priest  of  the 
call  sitting  as  first  and  supreme,  taste  of  the  drops  of 
understanding1  and  light. 

2.  O  purifying  Fire,  full  of  light  there  drip  for  thee  drops 
of  understanding;  give  us  the  supreme  desirable  thing  in 
thy  self-law  for  the  advent  of  the  gods. 

3.  To  thee,  the  illumined  seer,  come  these  drops  drip¬ 
ping  light,  O  right  and  true,  O  Fire;  then  thou  blazcst  up 
as  the  supreme  Rishi.  Become  the  protector  of  our  sacrifice. 

4.  On  thee  they  fall,  the  drops  of  understanding  and 
light,  O  unseizable2  Ray!  O  thou  with  whom  is  the  puis¬ 
sance!  Declared  by  the  seers  of  truth  thou  hast  come  with 
the  vast  light.  Accept  our  offerings,  O  wise  intelligence ! 

5.  Most  full  of  enei'gy  is  the  understanding  held  up  in 
the  middle  for  thee,  this  is  our  gift  to  thee.  The  drops 
drip  over  thy  skin,  O  shining  one,:}  take  them  to  thee  in  the 
way  of  the  gods. 


or,  strength 
or,  uncontrollable 
or,  Lord  of  riches, 


161 


291 


fr>bH».Pjkf>  a  IB  kBIbIKBJ  mkkik&  l&lki 
Jr  IB  blPlhb£  bBBiii  klB  &fek£  kkllS2S 


IIXH  t&t  mBkSlilBBfc  lB±t& 
I  :i>h|PB  -.RjiftblK  :fckBe  ^Blfcajili 


life II  :biK  P*PaP]hSlP->blb-tlfr  b4fr&  PI P-».h  kfejl  lk 
IB  Ihnahj  JafeJ!£  lk|  i£&l£llU£j  iSahBiE  JfekJ  kB£ 


1 1  ill  I  liKBt  JBBlklR  B  :kfei  BiBBiBtlWi]B±JBb 
I  kith  iBiatealteB^kb  IBateJh  :fefi  kjkj  k  Bk  kBe 


ill  KktB  k«  fclkBB  B>}B  k  JBBBJk  ia&jSa 

I  ikitskJk  ^£B  Bk  k£  :»-»kjk\kj  khijkktUg  JB  kie 


km 


7I>ILI  OUSATC  a  HI.  O.I.  SNI\7AH 


MANDALA  THREE 


i 


SUKTA  22 

1.  This  is  that  Fire  in  which  Indra,  desiring  the  wine, 
held  it  in  his  belly;  our  laud  rises  to  thee  because  thou 
hast  won  the  thousandfold  plenitude  as  if  a  steed  of  swift¬ 
ness,  O  knower  of  all  things  born ! 

2.  O  Fire,  that  splendour  of  thine  which  is  in  heaven 
and  which  is  in  the  earth  and  its  growths  and  its  waters, 
O  lord  of  sacrifice,  by  which  thou  hast  extended  the  wide 
mid-air  it  is  a  brilliant  ocean  of  light  in  which  is  divine 
vision. 

3.  O  Fire,  thou  goest  towards  the  ocean  of  the  sky,  thou 
speakest  towards  the  gods  who  are  masters  of  knowledge,1 
towards  the  waters  that  abide  above  in  the  luminous  world 
of  the  sun  and  the  waters  that  are  below. 

4.  Let  thy  Fires  that  dwell  in  the  waters  joining  with 
those  that  descend  the  slopes  accept  the  sacrifice,  mighty 
impelling  forces,  in  which  there  is  no  harm  nor  any 
distress. 

5.  O  Fire,  achieve  at  my  call  the  Revealing  Speech  the 
many-actioned,  the  lasting  conquest  of  the  Light.  May 
there  be  for  us  a  Son  of  our  begetting  pervading2  in  his 
birth;  O  Fire,  may  there  be  created  in  us  that  true  think¬ 
ing  of  thine. 


1  or,  the  gods  of  the  planes  (seats) 

2  or,  himself  a  begetter 


163 


nv,n  ^  m  jjiba&fe  :&ibi 

i  telb  iabUHJeS  v»b>»-tifc  :Ui  bib  b^tS  btht9P-£ 


11*11  ih->-b^>t»  iijJbbliE  bblii  IMgbl 

l  i*iiSi»  ^psjfc  ^vHhnofe  UEhjh  lie  lb  to£  lfei  bj 


ufell  lbb  ftfthlbibie  JJa  <j»Ktte^  bbftfefe  *j£i  b^K 
t  >■»>■?  Kj  taPlh  Plufo  tei£  l£fe 


1^11  bl&  bblbJfeH  rnk  ib  *tub£is  t>ih  bj  btte 

ibl&iS  :bJi?J?.|  lbteb£  Iblib  l^afedjbfc; 


Hill  :i£%blb  bLie  teb  Ibbabb 
l  IbtoJs  JBilf=3ifeJ<fe  lbb  feiteb  IJte  bfejS  :bbjhbj 


3  Hid  OIXSAK  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MAN  D ALA  1'HREE 


Sukta  23 

1.  Churned  out  and  well-established  in  the  house  of 
his  session,  the  Youth,  the  Seer,  the  leader  of  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice,  imperishable  in  the  perishing  woodlands,  the 
Fire,  the  knower  of  all  things  born,  has  founded  here 
immortality. 

2.  The  sons  of  the  B  ringer,  god-inspired  and  god- 
beloved,  have  churned  out  Fire  of  the  perfect  discernment. 
O  Fire,  look  widely  on  us  with  the  vast  riches,  become 
the  leader  of  our  impulsions  throughout  the  days. 

3.  The  ten  who  throw  the  Light  have  brought  to  birth 
all  around  the  Ancient  One  well-born  in  his  mothers  and 
well-beloved.  Affirm  with  lauds,  O  god-inspired,  the  Fire 
lit  by  the  god-beloved,  that  he  may  be  the  controller  of 
men. 

4.  One  has  set  thee  in  the  supreme  seat  of  the  earth,  in 
the  seat  of  the  Word  of  Revelation,  in  the  happy  bright¬ 
ness  of  the  days:  O  Fire,  opulently  shine  in  the  human 
being,  in  the  river  of  rocks,  in  the  stream  of  flowing- 
waters,  in  the  stream  of  inspiration.1 

5.  O  Fire,  achieve  at  my  call  the  Revealing  Speech  the 
many-actioned,  the  lasting  conquest  of  the  Light.  May 
there  be  for  us  a  Son  of  our  begetting  pervading2  in  his 
birth;  O  Fire,  may  there  be  created  in  us  that  true  think¬ 
ing  of  thine. 


1  or,  in  the  river  Drishadwati,  in  Apayaya  and  in  Saraswati. 

2  or,  himself  a  begetter 


165 


991 


Ufcll  ih  Jb£  tb  & 

|  Uta*  hllAhUMfr  l^bUl  iiUbj  ICjjmife  bjlbb  ^16 

II  ^  I)  :bmjbj  mb  ib%ib3b 

I  Jb2bjb  lbbHb%E  bjib&  :bbj  bile 

V»b  £*£ 


llV)U  :bhb&  :b  Sjijfcifej  l  Wmnfth  mbiib  bji  blkife  li  bile 


llxll  :bblb  £  b  Sa£b  I  :ibj  lbittttJ^Jbijibj^SbJ  .bile 
llfell  hit  <bb  :%b  bb  I  b§ifrbft  :jti^a  %Iilb  khife  bile 


ll^ll  b>i3o.B>  ^b  S  b->taU'  i  :biitle  y^lbyya  bb.'ihjb  1S°S  bile 


M ^ II  likibbb  lb  ^bJblhlSibiibal  I  bilbUblititjie  lbbb  biSb  bile 


ak  ifefe 


3>II.I  OM.SAK  3H1.  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


Sukta  24 

1.  O  Fire,  overpower  the  hostile  armies,  hurl  them 
from  us;  hard  to  pierce,  pierce  the  enemy-powers,  found 
thy  splendour  in  him  who  carries  through  the  sacrifice. 

2.  O  Fire,  thou  art  kindled  by  the  word  of  revelation, 
the  immortal  who  comes  to  the  offering,  accept  wholly 
our  pilgrim-sacrifice. 

3.  O  Fire,  ever-wakefui  with  thy  light,  O  son  of  force, 
invoked  sit  on  my  seat  of  sacrifice. 


4.  O  Fire,  with  all  thy  divine  fires  greaten  in  our 
sacrifices  the  word  that  has  sight. 


5.  O  Fire,  give  to  the  giver  a  wealth  full  of  hero- 
strengths  enclosing  us;  intensify  the  force  in  us  having 
with  us  the  Son. 


Sukta  25 

1 .  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  son  of  heaven  by  the  body  of 
the  earth,  the  conscious  knower,  even  the  omniscient. 
Sacrifice  to  each  god  in  turn,  O  thou  who  knowest. 


2.  Fire  the  knower  wins  the  hero-energies,  wins  the 
plenitudes  striving  towards  immortality.  So  do  thou 
bring  to  us  the  gods,  O  giver  of  the  manifold  plenty. 


167 


891 


llfell  :£jLue  Ikfefe  fc®£fei  i>^S  :bij£  ^b  b 

I  :)HMte  bftahjb  :bjbji££fei!te  b  Jfeife 


Hell  bfeisabi  fejbjbiibtfc  KfeJ  fcblbfe-%  |bbb  bjbilfe 
bbJJafcfe  ^Wtel  bfebbilitm*  a 


II $11  feblfe^  JbbtJijS  feci  Jbyi  (fefa&fe  ifeji  bifeb 
I  feilaisis  (P-»ho>»j$  lfeilbbj  l‘>JII>M»  >Wlfr»fc> 


litli 


llV.ll  Jb££  blbi&fct  bUteibb 
I  :fe%bib  ji£'  :feiy  bJiS  ^frabjb  ibb  bbs 

llxll  lbfe  blfehfajb  lb±febfc 

I  bblfe  H^bjbh  ibbLk'B  b}iS  U&lfe  bi2.^  bile 


llfell  :bJ4J±b  ^±fefei£  :bife  bfc& 
I  :ibK  ^bJK  Jb%  bjlit  lie  bbsteSb}  ^bbjhlb^btjfe 


a’au  OIXSAN  3HX  OX  SNIVAH 


M  AND  ALA  THREE 


3.  The  Fire,  free  from  all  ignorance,  illumines  Earth 
and  Heaven  the  divine  and  immortal  mothers  of  all 
things;  possessing  all  he  is  manifold  in  his  delights  by 
his  plenitudes  and  his  dispensations. 

4.  O  Fire,  and  O  Indra,  here  in  the  gated  house  of  the 
giver  who  offers  the  wine,  come  to  the  sacrifice,  gods 
unforgetting,  for  the  drinking  of  the  Soma  wine. 

5.  O  Fire,  thou  shinesr  high,  eternal  in  the  house  of 
the  waters,  O  son  of  force,  O  knower  of  all  things  born, 
greatening  under  thy  guard  the  worlds  of  thy  session. 


Sukta  26 

1.  We  the  Kushikas,  bringing  the  offering,  desiring 
the  Treasure,  call  by  our  words  Fire,  the  universal  god¬ 
head,  discerning  him  by  the  mind,  as  the  follower  of  the 
truth,  who  finds  the  world  of  the  sun,  the  great  giver,  the 
divine  and  rapturous  charioteer. 

2.  We  call  to  guard  us  that  brilliant  Fire,  the  uni¬ 
versal  godhead,  who  grows  in  the  mother,  the  master  of 
the  word,  the  speaker  and  the  hearer,  for  the  human 
being’s  forming  of  the  godhead,  the  illumined  Seer,  the 
guest,  the  swift  Traveller. 

3.  As  if  the  neighing  Horse  by  the  mothers,,  the  uni¬ 
versal  godhead  is  kindled  high  by  the  Kushikas  from 
generation  to  generation;  may  that  Fire  wakeful  in  the 
Immortals  give  to  us  the  hero-strength  and  good  power 
of  the  Horse  and  the  ecstasy. 


169 


iPoll  tmifemk  MhhJ  yiiU  P  ^h-Mj£hj  Piki!  22JJi 
I  kmmifefe  XHhJ  PPi?Jhtej  jnlhft(lSkmtt>-ll3Pl£ 


ll?ll  Phibfch  JtfcjLlklE  kjymtjifefei  P&UP1  2afcjk 
1  PH  P  IS  klPJJ)2£  PJi±  liS  iisJ^hSkfeiyh  iJftJfcJ 


nc\ii  urn  itijxxj£  ilia  mt£sy±u±^j  j&isi  fetfej^jifeie 

i  kwie  tt  ykifefc  ji  pi  m^pm  lPPite  Pip-bijis 


tl^ll  :ixya  ihkfej  PP  ftlPalt  JBfelifcUsPle  IftlteSfebi 

I  Ift^hlPish  hlkU.VPjP-Sjltfc  jnl.lnl.  PIPPIP 


llV.it  :teP<feh%  P  l^PJ  :.l£l£.jPJXfe  JLtmja.  JPPJlPi  P 

I  hm=  |b|  feJ±r/fct!am  lie  hsa^fetfej  mitt  IPteJPiJle 

; 


llxll  tUttlkle  IPPh  PiJPb£  a  mp^kiPJ  (Pik 
I  Ptti??>'Pflh  :m£ttJH  HP  :kktiJttjyakJPiU£lk  £±P  IS 


a'HH  01XSA1V  HHX  OX  SMJAIAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


4.  Let  them  go  forward,  the  plenitudes  with  the 
strengths,  thy  Fires;  they  have  yoked  the  dappled  mares 
mingled  together  to  reach  bliss  and  make  the  mountains 
tremble,  before  them  the  life-gods,  omniscient,  pouring 
the  Vast,  inviolable. 

5.  The  life-gods  with  their  glory  of  fire,  universal  in  the 
peoples,1  we  desire  as  our  brilliant  and  forceful  guard; 
great  givers  are  they,  thunderous  and  terrible,  clothed 
as  if  in  raiment  of  rain,  they  are  like  roaring  lions. 

6.  Host  upon  host,  troop  upon  troop  with  their  pro¬ 
claimings  of  the  Fire  we  desire  the  luminous  energy  of  the 
life-gods;  they  come  to  the  sacrifice  driving  their  dappled 
horses,  their  achievement  cannot  be  taken  from  them, 
they  are  wise  thinkers  in  the  discoveries  of  knowledge. 

7.  I  am  the  Fire,  I  am  from  my  birth  the  knower  of 
all  things  born;  light  is  my  eye,  in  my  mouth  is  immorta¬ 
lity;  I  am  the  triple  Ray,  I  am  the  measurer  of  the  mid¬ 
world,  I  am  the  unceasing  illumination,  I  am  the  offering. 

8.  He  has  purified  through  the  three  filters  the  Ray, 
following  the  thought  with  the  heart  he  has  reached 
knowledge  of  the  light;  he  has  created  by  the  self-laws 
of  his  nature  the  supreme  ecstasy  and  his  sight  has 
embraced  earth  and  heaven. 

9.  He  is  a  fountain  with  a  hundred  streams  that  is  never 
exhausted,  with  his  illumined  consciousness  he  is  the 
father  and  accorder  of  all  that  must  be  spoken ;  he  takes 
his  rapture  in  the  lap  of  the  Father  and  Mother  and 
earth  and  heaven  fill  him  full,  the  speaker  of  truth. 

1  or,  dragging  all  with  them, 


171 


ZL I 


ti?u  :tam  mxj.  i  yaya  a  a^&isyay?.  ama  .laxa 


ns\u  kaayta  ajiaaaj  i  laaia  >yyiH*x£  :aiaa:  y^  it>4^ 


U3.li  us  i  :uiU£fe  iJitej  usxi  ukaa  miaa  a 


nVju  ?u=h^  aiuauyjs  i  :a!iut  ikiajujuu  yuaie  miauL 


11*11 


i  :u£|  isaxh  :ays^a.-U£  yaaaaija 


ufeu  u^u  uyaf  aye  i  :tusjite  Maa  aa  aa  y  a%is  aue 


iihu  kaiamaj  .tuayaJss  i  kuarn  axy&  i>aj  aasy-aj  ayie  e| 


uiu  :aa±u  pjiix^jip^  i  *>v°-ipp.  iaiiUoaja  yusi-uie  uaia  y>  a 

6\c 


auix  oixsaiv  xhx  ox  sxnah 


MANDALA  THREE 


Sukta  27 

1.  Forward  move  the  luminous  plenitudes  bearing  the 
offering  with  the  ladle  of  light;  the  seeker  of  bliss  travels 
to  the  gods. 

2.  I  pray  by  the  word  the  Fire  with  its  illumined 
consciousness,  who  accomplishes  the  sacrifice,  who  has 
the  inspiration,  who  has  the  firm  holding. 

3.  O  Fire,  may  we  have  the  power  to  rein  thee,  the 
divine  steed  of  swiftness,  may  we  cross  through  the  hos¬ 
tile  forces. 

4.  Fire  high  blazing  in  the  rite  of  the  path,  Fire  whom 
we  must  pray,  who  purifies,  with  his  tresses  of  flame — him 
we  desire. 

5.  He  is  the  immortal,  wide  in  might,  clothed  in 
raiment  of  light;  well-fed  with  the  oblation,  Fire  is  the 
carrier  of  the  offerings  in  the  sacrifice. 

6.  Assailed  by  the  opponent  the  doers  of  sacrifice, 
setting  to  work  the  ladle,  keeping  the  true  thought,  have 
made  the  Fire  to  guard  them. 

7.  The  immortal,  the  godhead,  the  priest  of  the  call 
goes  in  our  front  with  his  mage  wisdom,  impelling  the 
discoveries  of  knowledge. 

8.  He  is  held  as  the  Horse  in  the  plenitudes,  he  is  led 
along  in  the  rites  of  the  path,  he  is  the  illumined  seer 
who  accomplishes  the  sacrifice. 

al4 


173 


I  Sjk^bkjk  :  In  lob  khb  bb  IbQ  In  tab 


llVii  II  bli  HC^b  bite 


llxill  ^2°|  P'kohjS  b  |  :k$ibb^»  t  ^bft^hokjk  :j±tpe  Jbb 


llfeill  mi  Pho>jutjkk 


I  miftb 


M  hfefebj&  2y±mjie  i  kjn-.  hhbmbjifr  ^b-otbihh  jtes 


iii in  :tem  umj  i  mtm  by*  k>Pk>6nk>^b  m^te 


no i II  htetejhbj(bk  bite  I  b&i&  MBS  boib  teb  ibi  bj 


ll'bll  ibb  >Phj  hiteb  I  fab  btthfa  lhifafa  Jfat^b  fab  ifafaj 


MIX  OIXSAJAI  3HX  OX  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


9.  He  was  made  by  the  Thought,  o.nc  Supreme;1  it 
held  the  child  of  beings,  the  father  of  the  Understanding 
in  the  body.2 

10.  The  word  of  revelation  born  from  the  under¬ 
standing  sets  thee  within,  one  supreme,  O  thou  force 
fully  created,  O  Fire,  the  perfect  thinker  and  the  aspirant. 

1 1 .  Fire  the  swift  in  motion,  who  crosses  through  the 
waters,  the  illumined  seers  desiring  to  conquer  in  the 
union  with  the  Truth  set  ablaze  by  the  plenitudes. 

12.  I  pray  Fire,  the  seer-will,  the  Son  of  Energy  flaming 
out  in  heaven  in  the  rite  of  the  path. 

13.  One  to  be  prayed,  to  be  worshipped  with  obeisance, 
one  who  sees3  through  the  darkness,  the  Fire  is  kindled 
high,  the  male  of  the  herd. 

14.  Mighty  and  male  the  Fire  is  kindled  high,  he  is 
like  a  horse  that  carries  the  gods,  him  they  pray  who 
bring  the  oflferings. 

15.  Thee,  mighty  and  male,  we  male  and  mighty  kindle 
high,  O  Bull  of  the  herds,  O  Fire,  and  thou  illuminest 
the  Vast. 


1  or,  the  desirable  one; 

2  or,  the  daughter  of  the  Understanding  set  him  in  us  the  child  born 
from  creatures  and  their  father. 

8  or,  is  seen 


175 


Il&ll  IfefeS  ttlfcih  kijmt  IHyhhmj  mil 

I  UUU'K 


'bfc  a^: 


iih.ii  i  HucoyK  i^liie  turn  mis 


uV)H  m  mmbtej  mis 

i  Wu>§i^kfe  itico^R  :mym  %  mm  yym  mis 


llxlt  :liy»  bfeSteJ  ^jppj  n  t  fctelUK  im  trt^l?  mis 

1  b->huv  ^o.  ShjifcipayK  :b^Piit>  bbH  PbjjMUt 


llfcli  :i±iH  |  bh.^tgy  pj  p§iMtig>yfi  Ijyfe  mis 

uhn  tegafejh  b->bit'  h  i  :p^>jh  m  m  iLtSmma  mis  igy£ 


u in  y»bihh)  ymmus  i  :k%km  im9°i>K  y*  mim  mis 

a*& 

a-aw  oixsaiai  am  cx  snwah 


MANDALA  THREE 


Sukta  28 

1.  O  Fire,  accept  our  offering,  the  frontal  oblation 
in  the  dawn  pressing  of  the  wine,  O  knower  of  the  births, 
O  rich  in  thought. 

2.  O  Fire,  for  thee  is  the  frontal  offering  prepared  and 
dressed,  that  accept,  O  youthful  god. 

3.  O  Fire,  come  to4  the  frontal  offering  that  is  cast  to 
thee  with  the  disappearance  of  day;  O  son  of  force,  thou 
art  established  in  the  rite  of  the  path. 

4.  In  the  noonday  pressing  of  the  wine,  O  seer,  knower 
of  all  tilings  born,  accept  the  frontal  offering.  O  Fire,  the 
wise  thinkers  in  their  discoveries  of  knowledge  impair 
not  thy  portion,  who  art  the  mighty  one. 

5.  O  Fire,  in  the  third  pressing  also  thou  hast  desire 
of  the  frontal  offering  cast  to  thee,  O  son  of  force;  do  thou 
by  the  illumination  establish  in  the  gods  the  pilgrim  sacri¬ 
fice  full  of  ecstasy  and  wakeful  in  the  immortals. 

6.  O  Fire,  increasing  accept  the  frontal  offering,  the 
oblation  cast  with  the  disappearance  of  the  day,  O  knower 
of  all  things  born. 


Sukta  29 

1.  This  is  the  churning  out,  this  the  bringing  to  birth 
that  is  done;  bring  the  Queen  of  the  peoples,  let  us  churn 
out  the  Fire  as  of  old. 


4  or,  devour 


177 


8/1 


H6\|l  h^b^hfrkglbtTog  bbjbtbj  fcS-$  klbfr  & 
I  :kLfeS  :nty  ysiu  (MiP^jb-  ^b.j>  |p>k-  {ph* 


ll^ll  llf»P->Phi;^blftb  ijh  :PbkJ>(Pbi:jK.kH?  fa  jbbj 

|  UEabfe  (b»bflb  J±  IbtsPln.^  bjkjglb  P-jh-k 


l|V)H  kfelJcB  lPftH*  Jlk  P>piPV>fi  Hfejj  ^  h^£h  . 

I  jttttydsS  PkkkP^K  P^hSkbJtb  :1k  IPb-»k 


uxii  kj.  ^pip* 

I  fcjie  maJRjh  UUk  &] 2  %k  ib^ikKQS 


II fell  2ikJkSkkk  ^SilklZii  i£ih  tlilifA  JhkiJakte 
I  klt^  ltifil  mibJS  bJkktjJkj  L>Xt  khlUfamS 


llcll  ik^kttJbak.k^lJkabJ^jbklU'  |ks$  bMbal 
i  kyx>kui  mtejS  fes  kk  u^jkj;br,>K> 


•J>IIJ  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SXI\TAH 


MANDALA  THREE 


2.  The  knower  of  all  births  is  set  in  the  two  tinders, 
like  an  unborn  child  well-placed  in  the  womb  of  the 
mothers,  Fire  who  is  to  be  prayed  from  day  to  day  by  men 
wakeful  and  bearing  their  offering. 

3.  Waking  to  knowledge  bring  him  down  in  her  lying- 
supine;  at  once  penetrated  she  has  brought  to  birth  the 
male  of  the  herd:  a  ruddy  pile  of  strength  his  might 
shines  forth,  the  son  of  the  Word  of  revelation  is  born  in 
the  manifestation  of  knowledge. 

4.  We  in  the  seat  of  the  Word  of  revelation,  on  the 
navel  centre  of  the  earth,  set  thee  within,  O  knower  of 
all  things  born,  for  the  carrying  of  the  oblations. 

5.  Churn  out,  O  men,  the  seer  who  creates  no  duality, 
the  immortal  thinker  and  knower  with  his  fair  front; 
Fire  who  is  the  supreme  intuition  in  the  sacrifice,  the 
blissful  one,  bring  to  birth  in  your  front,  O  men. 

6.  When  they  churn  him  out  by  the  strength  of  their 
arms  wide  he  shines,  he  is  like  a  horse  of  swiftness,  he  is 
luminous  in  the  woodlands;  he  is  like  a  richly  hued 
chariot  in  the  journeying  of  the  two  riders,  none  can 
impede  him;  burning  around  the  rocks  he  tears  the 
grasses. 

7.  Agni  when  he  is  bom  shines  waking  to  knowledge, 
he  is  the  Horse,  the  illumined  who  is  declared  by  the 
seers,  the  great  giver,  whom  the  gods  have  set  in  the 
pilgrim  sacrifices  as  the  carrier  of  the  offerings,  the  one 
to  be  prayed,  the  omniscient. 


179 


081 


llfeill  &  kjhtPlfr  HUtg  :feme  Ulkbi  15k 

I  klt±]£S£^  Ir.pp  litPfc^imhPk 


nii^u  pip?>  Id£  iifejfei  kite 

I  :jy£  :P£jPj  ihPjfi  :PPJPPj  ifekPjfi 


nUu  iajm>.k  kbkie  lLtii  mkib  :>jkik  kikkjkb  ib$>jkih 
I  pmppj  kb  kjbk  mj<?l>.k  afiiie  kb  ilballhkkk 


IIO ill  :ibj  ibhb  |k  lblkyi  lie  kilkkliE  k 
I  :ibfe|ile  |klle  Jkb  |lrfelj3fekj|k  H  me 


ll'bll  kh->t>  k±kkie  Iklbk  kb  |l|b£  kblkkb  :kijkme 
I  fta-HU'lb  HkS  kiblisibl&k  Inbfe  kb  kiln* 


ll?ll  :lb  Ibb  klkkb  kkb  kjbillkb  kafejl  klfek|felb% 
I  )klb  mkilB  kb  ibSim  kibixjkj  ibia  £  bi  :kl|  Xlb 


3*11:1  OI1S AW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  THREE 

8.  Sit,  O  priest  of  the  call,  in  that  world  which  is  thy 
own  waking  to  knowledge,  accomplish  the  sacrifice  in  the 
native  seat  of  deeds  well  done ;  manifesting  the  godheads1 
thou  sacrificest  to  the  gods  with  the  offering, — O  Fire, 
found  in  the  sacrificer  the  vast  expansion. 

9.  O  Friends,  create  his  mighty  smoke,  go  with 
unerring  steps  towards  the  plenitude;  this  is  the  Fire 
conqueror  in  the  battle,  by  whom  the  gods  overcame 
the  destroyers. 

10.  This  is  thy  native  seat  where  is  the  order  of  the 
Truth  whence  born  thou  shoncst  forth,  know  it  and  take 
there  thy  session,  then  give  increase  to  our  words. 

1 1 .  A  mighty  child  in  the  womb  he  is  called  the  son  of 
the  body;  when  he  is  born  he  becomes  one  who  voices 
the  godhead:  when  as  life  who  grows  in  the  mother  he 
has  been  fashioned  in  the  mother  he  becomes  a  gallop 
of  wind  in  his  movement. 

12.  Churned  out  with  the  good  churning  the  seer  set 
within  with  a  perfect  placing, — O  Fire,  make  easy  the 
paths  of  the  sacrifice,  offer  sacrifice  to  the  gods  for  the 
seeker  of  godhead. 

13.  Mortals  have  brought  to  birth  the  Immortal,  Fire 
with  his  strong  tusk,  the  unfailing  deliverer.2  The  ten 
sisters  who  move  as  companions  passion  over  the  male 
that  is  born. 


1  or,  bringing  the  gods 

2  or>  one  who  unfailing  crosses  through  all. 


0 


181 


Il^ll  Whja  %U2  hk  i£bj  kiilEJs  :l9^KJ|i?IP.h>K  lhhfeja 
I  iihijie  £b  PjiUS  lbi  J2£b 


uV>^ u  t^ji^b  >_yji  aufeiaj^  sbJtaE 

I  :lbj  fenjbchj  (jnr^B.  m±±bts  :itiK  bt+jiPfrK  ^bhlbhjie 


itxin  Pbuaai^aa  JijJQitj  mj  k 

I  JiJblfeySSb  teihkkUi  IPl^PiP  K 


aaia  oiisapv  a  Hi  ox  snwah 


Mandala  three 


14.  He  shone  out  from  the  eternal  with  his  seven 
priests  of  the  call  when  he  blazed  on  the  lap  of  the  mother, 
in  her  bosom  of  plenty.  He  is  full  of  joy  and  closes  not 
his  eyes  from  day  to  day,  once  he  has  been  born  from  the 
belly  of  the  Almighty  One. 

15.  Fighting  down  the  unfriendly  powers  like  the 
marching  hosts  of  the  life-gods  the  first-born  of  the  Word 
come  to  know  all  that  is:  the  Kushikas  have  sent  forth 
the  luminous  word,  one  by  one  they  have  kindled  the  Fire 
in  the  house. 

16.  Because  here  today  in  the  going  forward  of  this 
sacrifice  we  have  chosen  thee,  O  priest  of  the  call,  O 
thou  who  wakest  to  knowledge,  thou  hast  moved 
to  the  Permanent,  thou  hast  achieved  by  thy  toil  the 
Permanent ;  knowing,  come  as  one  possessed  of  knowledge 
to  the  Soma-wine. 


183 


MANDALA  FOUR 


981 


IISII  IS  hii>  l2.*l±ite£  14  HNW  M^lli 

I  hPtkbtbj  (bbj  Ib-P  lni>b  ^2it  kjtlS 

I  iiii  utMllti  ttel  k  feib^bfr  uakblMi  Mi 


llhll  HPb^Infab-  PtfrU  Pb^lr.hb.  h^bjlkblblPSk 
kkkbtth  yihJ.  kkbPh  'Pkfi  Ifta-le  Ibfr  b^bb  He  k>klni>b  iUlTt  li 


ll^ll  kkP^-K  UlilE  b^lkbtbj  kP^K  PUtc  b^lkb^  Ibahlk  Pfrb  Mkb 

^ijbi  IfeStv  Uj£  HJtoi  Pj>kb^  y±l^  lbb->kk  Pkjbk  kill  1M1 


«  kiit, 


kbh>  ibftkib 


VAMADEVA  GAUTAMA 


SUKTA  1 

1.  Thee,  O  Fire,  ever  with  one  passion  the  gods  have 
sent  inwards,  the  divine  Traveller;1  with  the  will  they 
sent  thee  in;  O  master  of  sacrifice,  they  brought  to  birth 
the  immortal  in  mortals,  the  divine  who  brings  in  the 
divinity,  the  conscious  thinker,  they  brought  to  birth 
the  universal  who  brings  in  the  divinity,  the  conscious 
thinker. 

2.  Then  do  thou,  O  Fire,  turn  towards  the  godheads 
with  the  right  thinking  Varuna,  thy  brother  who 
delights  in  the  sacrifice,  the  eldest  who  delights  in  the 
sacrifice, — even  him  who  keeps  the  truth,  son  of  the 
infinite  Mother  who  upholds  seeing-men,  the  king  who 
upholds  seeing-men. 

3.  O  Friend,  turn  towards  and  to  us  in  his  motion 
the  Friend  as  two  rapid  chariot-horses  turn  a  swift 
wheel,  for  us,  O  strong  worker,  like  galloping  horses; 
O  Fire,  mayst  thou  be  with  us  and  find  for  us  bliss  in 
Varuna  and  in  the  Life-powers  who  carry  the  universal 
light;  for  the  begetting  of  the  Son,  O  thou  flaming  into 
lustre,  create  for  us  peace,  for  us,  O  strong  worker, 
create  the  peace. 


1  or,  worker.  This  root  seems  to  have  indicated  originally  any  strong 
motion,  action  or  work. 


187 


88 1 


II6MI  Jtle  :Kjfc°-IIHle  k^kijh  :i^il£  %ifcie 

|  ;U>»MlkkjU'  h->k^  ^lk»  Ltjitt  P-jk  lk>h  it  l?:i‘>KJ 


tl^ll  :^bh  fcfc&t  £lhi  :ihllrehPaB  t  hL  fejifi 

1  tafrPk  IkUfcbj  k^  hl»ft  J2illk6  ISalSs  MK 


HV)U  hjh  k  4422k  jlniu  Inkk  ^  £$J2  && 

I  (khP-  ii»k>  ^frjk  <j^kk  ytkSktie  yi  k>  & 


lull  fehfltt3i Mt  is  HJlJaS  lkifej  (Hfelsyfe  :kk%k  |9sikjk 

|  •IQa^kkJlh  ksys^  Pl9k]  Irtln’tfe  fcil£  Jli 


3313  Oli.SAIAl  3HX  OX  SNIMAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


4.  Do  thou,  O  Fire,  for  thou  knowest,  labour  away 
from  us  the  wrath  of  divine  Varuna;  flaming  into  lustre, 
strongest  to  sacrifice,  mightiest  to  bear,  unloose  from  us 
all  hostile  powers. 

5.  Do  thou,  O  Fire,  be  most  close  to  us  with  thy  pro¬ 
tection,  be  most  near  in  the  dawning  of  this  dawn: 
rejoicing  in  us  put  away  from  us  Varuna1  by  the  sacrifice; 
reach  the  bliss,  be  ready  to  our  call. 

6.  Most  glorious  is  the  vision  of  this  Godhead,  most 
richly  bright  in  mortals;  as  if  the  pure  and  warm  butter 
of  the  milch-cow  that  cannot  be  slain,  her  desirable  gift 
is  the  vision  of  the  Godhead.2 

7.  Three  are  they,  his  supreme  truths,  the  desirable 
births  of  the  divine  Fire;  within  in  the  infinite  he  is 
spread  wide  everywhere  and  has  come  to  us  pure  and 
brilliant  and  noble,  shining  in  his  beauty.3  One  who 
has  spread  wide  within  in  the  infinite;  he  in  his  luminous 
beauty  comes  to  us. 


1  i.e.  the  pressure  of  the  wrath  of  Varuna  against  our  impurity. 

The  prayer  to  put  Varuna  away  sounds  strange.  But  if  the  inner  sense 
is  grasped  it  becomes  cogent  and  apposite.  The  sacrificcr — the  seeker — 
is  praying  Agni  to  be  close  to  him,  to  protect  him.  He  is  aspiring  that  the 
Divine  Fire  should  be  his  protector  when  the  Dawn  of  die  higher  light 
comes  to  his  soul,  Varuna  being  the  Lord  of  wisdom. 

2  Here  the  connection  between  Fire  and  Ray-Cow  and  Aditi  comes  out; 
so  also  the  psychological  nature  of  the  clarified  butter  and  its  connection 
with  the  vision  of  the  Sun. 

Who  is  this  cow  that  “cannot  be  slain”  if  not  the  cow  aditi — the  Infinite 
Mother — the  supreme  Divine  Consciousness  creative  of  the  cosmos,  of  the 
gods  and  the  demons,  of  men  and  of  all  that  is? 

3  These  three  births  of  Fire  are  not,  as  usually  explained,  its  three  phy 
sical  forms — which  even  if  accepted  (taken)  shows  the  Vedic  people  far  from 


al5 


189 


061 


HUll  kktftfc  JHuMt  JXmilhJtS 

I  JtJk  iu&  (kJ£l  fcal  jilh  Skkkh  :fctfeJS  mHJ£  k 


ii o  ^  n  kkikkik  ippjp  iPh^ra  kku&e  mke  %sbj  ha  itxy 

I  Ubfrb^.  U-»  IflifeMM  jK>  ^i±  £  k 


n'bll  hlhl^PJJak  toPh  iiaX  kfelk  %ftl  Ikkk&  k 

I  i>7^ife>  iiiil  k  ii  :k±bi£t2  yjLk±mi%  k 


ll?ll  kkk  p|Ph^hj  :kai  i£k  lkikkj  irkilfe  mi-r-%U 
I  IkiXfl-tXJ  ik^  kkk  £ajk  kJXkStJ  Jkl  k 


HHIJ  OIXSAK  XHl  OX  SMIAIAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


8.  He  is  a  messenger,  a  priest  of  the  Call,  whose 
yearning  is  towards  all  the  planes,  golden  is  his  chariot, 
red  are  his  horses,  ecstatic  his  tongue  of  flame,  beautiful 
his  body,* 1  wide  his  lustre,  ever  is  he  rapturous  like  a 
banquet  hall  full  of  the  wine.2 

9.  He  makes  men  conscious  of  the  knowledge  and  is 
the  friend  of  their  sacrifice;  they  lead  him  on  with  a 
mighty  cord;  he  dwells  in  the  gated  house  of  the  being 
accomplishing  his  aims;  divine,  he  accepts  companionship 
in  the  riches  of  the  mortal. 

10.  Let  this  Fire  taking  knowledge  of  all  things  lead 
us  towards  the  ecstasy.  That  is  enjoyed  by  the  Gods, 
which  all  the  immortals  created  by  the  thought  and 
Father  Heaven  was  its  begetter  raining  the  truth.3 

11.  He  was  born  first  and  supreme  in  the  Rivers,4  in 
the  foundation  of  the  vast  mid-world,  in  his  native  seat; 
without  head,  without  feet,  concealing  his  two  ends  he 
joins  them  in  the  lair  of  the  Bull.5 


the  mere  primitive  barbarian — His  birth  is  connected  with  Truth — His 
births  are  “within  in  the  Infinite’? — saccidananda.  These  are  the  three  levels 
of  the  earthly  evolution  on  each  of  which  this  Divine  Fire  takes  his  birth, 
parivitah ,  on  the  plane  of  matter  and  life  and  mind. 

1  or,  great  is  his  body, 

2  or,  well-stored  with  food. 

3  This  joy — Ratna — in  its  origin  is  created  by  the  immortals  with  the 
help  of  their  “thought” — and  it  was  by  raining  down  upon  the  lower 
hemisphere  of  the  Truth  that  gave  birth  to  the  joy  here. 

4  or,  in  our  habitations, 

6  The  same  Fire  joins  his  two  extremities  of  the  superconscient  and  the 
spirit  and  the  inconscient  matter — in  the  lair  of  the  Bull.  This  is  the  Bull 
which  represents  the  Purusha.  .  . .  The  lair  of  the  Bull  is  the  original  status 
of  Him  called  at  other  places,  visnoh  paramam  padam ,  sada  paiyanti  surayah. 


191 


261 


llV^H  jej  jMSjhP^hljt  j£.ti  Ptefe  miaJ=  Jit  S22I 
l  ksjHP*h  ijh  Piktb  ill  Jaakfel  ippp  ip^i>  p 


llA^II  wuh<£p.tpj|hi'  PiPPJ  >.|o.p>np  itjls  )mfc-»frPi;h 

I  PP4P  fej  JPltJie  Pitting  J^te  1PJPPP  PPskfa  ^ 


llfefcll  :iPJLfcJ  UPakpOfe  mSi>u»n>  pp  ih£fi  :lppii;ic 
I  :ilnlMiUHPlfe.pJ^  is  HJie  I  tap  It  ^±PbJ  isHifeiiiiie 


Ilk*  II  Jnak  P'HPP^PinHj  1PP  ipip.pj  ltapp  1PP 

i  ay±  tiHpfe  ipip  h^p^  pippj  Hpa  pus  pis  is 


a-au  OI1SAIM  3H1  OX  SNXMAH 


MAN D ALA  FOUR 


12.  He  came  forth  with  a  vibrancy  of  light,  the  first 
and  supreme  force,  in  the  native  seat  of  Truth,  in  the 
lair  of  the  Bull,  desirable  and  young  and  beautiful  of 
body1  and  wide  in  lustre;  the  seven  Beloved  brought  him 
to  birth  for  the  Bull.2 


13.  Here,  our  human  fathers  went  forward  on  their 
way  towards  the  Truth  desiring  to  possess  it;  they  drove 
upwards  the  luminous  ones,  the  good  milk-cows  in  their 
stone  (rocky)  pen  within  the  hiding  cave,  calling  to  the 
Dawns.3 


14.  They  rent  the  hill,  they  made  themselves  bright  and 
pure,  others  around  them  proclaimed  that  work  of 
theirs;  drivers  of  the  herd,4  they  sang  the  chant  of  illumi¬ 
nation  to  the  Doer  of  the  work;  they  found  the  Light, 
they  shone  with  their  thoughts.5 


15.  By  a  mind  seeking  the  Rays  they  rent  the  firm 
massed  hill  which  encircled  and  repressed  the  shining 
herds,  men  desiring  laid  open  the  strong  pen  full  of  the 
Ray-Cows  by  the  divine  word. 


1  or,  great  in  body 

2  or,  brought  to  birth  the  Bull  (but  the  case  is  Dative). 

3  This  Rik  makes  the  connection  between  the  hidden  cows  and  the  Truth, 
also,  the  Cows  and  the  Dawn. 

4  Literally,  having  the  control  over  the  animal  or  animals,  or,  the  “instru¬ 
ments  of  control.” 

5  or,  they  did  work  by  their  thoughts.  This  is  Sayana’s  interpretation. 


193 


tloku  tibtopm  Itit  iay2h£  :kilnlne  fchlMfrjamie 
I  HiinltaP|Hh-jPJfrlh|&y 


ll^ill  :(jcHPfehj>jh  i±  ^hlfelt  KliJile  ysJQaJs 
I  pooujit  p^Hb^bj  >ip^  utippib-TeTt  ifiale 


[\?U\  hiB  h&h  fcfej  J£i±i  BjfcS 

I  KPfcpfe  P>t?>lh.  feii.  ksjlftftftl??  UilhP£  Ufeib  HiJUfi 


!l6\fcU  fajfiih  l£  »Pt«J^  liiih  lJj££2sikiJH^.fe  Jli&  lie 
i  p~>pip  yiia£  s^ys  kfe^i  £tyS  y±t 


h^ii  :.u±  lKiahyn^^fejttejite  i£ 

I  ps»p|  lajlltii  :Siit  HaH  :fe£ykfc  hll*  JifeJS  B£±li  y 


71>IIJ  OHS  AH  a  Hi  OX  SNHAH 


mandala  four 


16.  They  meditated1  on  the  first  name  of  the  Milk-cow, 
they  discovered  the  thrice  seven  supreme  planes2  of  the 
mother;  That  knowing  the  herds  lowed  towards  it,  the 
ruddy  Dawn  became  manifest  by  the  glory  of  the  Cow 
of  Light. 

17.  The  darkness  was  wounded  and  vanished,  Heaven 
shone  out,  up  arose  the  light  of  the  divine  Dawn,  the 
Sun  entered  into  the  fields  of  the  Vast,  looking  on  the 
straight  and  crooked  things  in  mortals. 

18.  Then,  indeed,  they  awoke  and  saw3  all  behind  and 
wide  around  them,  then,  indeed,  they  held  the  ecstasy 
that  is  enjoyed  in  heaven.  In  all  gated  houses  were  all 
the  gods.  O  Mitra,  O  Varuna,  let  there  be  the  Truth  for 
the  Thought. 

19.  May  my  speech  be  towards  the  upblazing  Fire,  the 
priest  of  the  call,  the  bringer  of  all  things,  strong  to  sacri¬ 
fice.  It  is  as  if  one  drank  from  the  pure  udder  of  the  cows  of 
light,  the  purified  juice  of  the  Plant  of  Delight  poured 
on  all  sides. 


20.  The  indivisibility  of  all  the  gods,  the  guest  of  all 
human  beings,  may  the  Fire  draw  to  us  the  protection  of 
the  gods  and  be  blissful  to  us,  the  knower  of  all  things 
born. 


1  or,  held  in  their  thought 

2  or,  names 

Then,  indeed,  and  after  waking  they  wholly  saw. 


195 


Ilk  I  Mbiktt  rkallsh  ^3^  kfellsJS  iSle  \tui  miM 

I  Jl£i2  1££K  IkfeJStiK;  itUL 


llxtl  blbls  fctejMi  Ifc  Usli£  :fci£  biie  Jfcifei 
I  P(P.i»fe}.w>  Yf.objig^mitakkHj  Jn^ii  lnltiae 


II jll  i^Ph  fc  ite  Jt£j  ki?£  k£lJj:ib  mmb  ibkK  imumie 
I  i£ofeji£  Lbkb  hih.  biJblfe  tat’b  ii^kia  tibia  mm 


Hill  :ki!fe  feLfeattkite  Jaalfe  tUtfcb  Jtm| 

l  ktimie  M£  JPJir;  mm  £j£  it  mbit  ifcfe  .fej 


It  &  ll  b3i2i|  bbkfcijibs^  bafeli  jMjn  matejii 

I  bjmi±}iyii?afe.|  mi  l&feaJB&t  Jfc 


c  m 


3>IIJ  DLLS  AW  7IHJ.  OX  S.MWAH 


litf  !vC 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTA  2 

1.  He  who  is  immortal  in  mortals  and  with  him  is  the 
Truth,  who  is  the  God  in  the  gods,  the  Traveller,1  has  been 
set  within  as  the  priest  of  the  call,  most  strong  for  sacri¬ 
fice,  to  blaze  out  with  the  might  of  his  flame,  to  give  men 
speed  on  the  way  by  the  power  of  their  offerings. 

2.  O  Son  of  Force,  here  today  art  thou  born  for  us  and 
movest  as  a  messenger  between  those  born  of  both  the 
Births  yoking,  O  sublime  Flame,  thy  males  straight  and 
massive  and  bright  in  lustre. 

3.  I  hold  in  thought  with  my  mind  thy  two  red  gallopers 
of  the  Truth,  swiftest,  raining  increase,  raining  light, 
yoking  the  ruddy-shining  pair  thou  movest  between  you 
Gods  and  the  mortal  peoples. 

4.  Aryaman  for  them  and  Mitra  and  Varuna,  Indra, 
Vishnu  and  the  Maruts  and  the  Ashwins  do  thou  well- 
horsed,  well-charioted,  great  in  the  joy  of  achievement, 
bring  now,  O  Fire,  for  the  giver  of  good  offerings. 

5.  O  Fire,  ever  inviolable  is  this  sacrifice  and  with  it  is 
the  Cow,  the  Sheep  and  the  Horse,  it  is  like  a  human 
friend,2  and  with  it,  O  mighty  Lord,  are  the  word  and 
the  offspring;  it  is  a  long  felicity  of  riches  with  a  wide  foun¬ 
dation,  and  with  it  is  the  hall. 


1  or,  fighter,  or  worker 

2  or,  it  is  a  comrade  with  whom  are  the  gods. 


197 


/ 


861 


llUll  ft^H-ppjii-^iy  &  bh  hiiPhM  :h  b  bil 

I  b^bb  b  ibbjb  lbjb  feyah  blifej  *y  kbbbj 


llo^ll  :blbb  IPPPJ  Mb  hlP^IOabjh  ib 

I  :inlll  bbj£  MPb  Jbb  (bibb  iteK  kiblb  Mb 


Moll  :jblbblb  ijia  :lbbbbjb  bj  im  b  k 

I  ifeikbb  frfcln'E  fo*b§  *i*i»  bJLbbie  P>kMfoh 


II7II  bblbilb  m^h  :b£bb  kiblM^  lie  bb  %i  k  Jbiie 
I  klbabj^  ibi  lb  bb|  pipi*k  bjhb  b  mb  ifcMfr 


iismi  kiMib  iile  tbfebji  khijb  inp>?  ^bPajk^  m 

I  PiyihbJPjhfrhmfcJ PJ  bbbj  imybilh  Mb 


ll^ll  balb  bblbblb  blblbSbj  kilblh  :ibbbl  Mbibit 
!  lblbi  bfabb  lb  b^faJtt  |blbbajbj  bibb  Mi  bib 


3ilIJ  OLI. SAW  3HJ.  O.L  SNWAH 


MAN D ALA  FOUR 


6.  To  him  who  brings  to  thee  thy  fuel  with  the  sweat 
of  his  labour  and  heats  his  head  with  thee,  be  a  protector 
in  thy  self-strength,  O  Fire,  and  guard  him  from  all 
around  that  would  do  him  evil. 

7  He  who  when  thou  desirest  thy  food  brings  thy  food 
to  thee,  who  whets  thy  flame  and  sends  upwards  the 
rapturous  guest,  he  who  as  seeker  of  the  godhead  kindles 
thee  in  his  gated  house,  in  him  may  there  be  the  abiding 
and  bounteous  riches. 

8.  He  who  in  the  dusk,  he  who  in  the  dawn  would  give 
expression  to  thee,  or  bringing  his  offering  makes  thee  a 
beloved  friend,  as  the  Horse  with  golden  trappings  in  his 
own  home  mayst  thou  carry  that  giver  beyond  the  evil. 

9.  He  who  gives  to  thee,  O  Fire,  to  the  Immortal,  and 
does  in  thee  the  work  outstretching  the  Ladle,  may  he 
not  in  his  labour  be  divorced  from  the  riches,  let  not 
the  sin  of  one  who  would  do  evil  surround  him. 

10.  He  in  whose  pilgrim-rite  thou  takest  pleasure  and, 
divine,  takest  delight  in  the  well-founded  work  of  a  mortal, 
may  the  Power  of  the  Call  be  pleased  with  him,  O  most 
young  Fire,  of  whom  worshipping  may  we  bring  about  the 
increase. 

1 1.  Let  the  knower  discriminate  the  Knowledge  and  the 
Ignorance,  the  straight  open  levels  and  the  crooked  that 
shut  in  mortals;  O  God,  for  the  riches,  for  the  right  birth 
of  the  Son,1  lavish  on  us  the  finite  and  guard  the  Infinite.2 


1  or,  for  the  riches  with  the  fair  offspring, 

2  Diti  and  Aditi,  the  divided  and  the  undivided  Consciousness,  the  Mother 
of  division,  and  the  Indivisible  Mother. 


199 


002 


ll^UkE  hlitokle  ip^rj  mm  kkkltJi 

I  iiinihfteihPUt  kiK  mikik  :rnih  :kkhj  :k  ifck  lhie 


llVji II  :^4t  kk].fi  irnk  XJSikkk  IkA^JK  IkJkkkJ 
I  kk  Uilife  JitfeU  %ttklfc  LtikJ  kaJft  :RkkEilt±  Utile 


11**11  :llr>Jli?;ire  ka£  :kk  pfelttJJlt  ikhie  Jkife  k  Jti 
I  :kjkk  lhJk9kJkijHjih  Iklkj  kthkfe  kk  1  LtiK 


llfejll  tlkkjkk  kk  kik  MRimtu?  kit  klk 

l  gikjk  kkkj  mrippR  :kjlkk£  ^klk  kiklk 


llk*ll  :&h  kie  ikitklkih  :ujkh  klkh  tile  |k$£  teams 
I  :|klkiJkS  IkikklkkJ  lkakSlkkite  :&llilS  kpk 


31II3  DLLS  AW  3HA  OJ.  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


12.  Seers  unconquered  proclaimed  the  seer,  they 
established1  him  within  in  the  gated  house  of  the  human 
being.  Then,  O  Flame,  mayst  thou  reach  with  thy 
journeying  feet  and,  exalted,  see  those  transcendent2  ones 
who  must  come  into  our  vision.3 

1 3.  O  Fire,  ever  most  young,  mayst  thou  giving  thy  good 
leading  to  the  singer  of  the  word  who  has  pressed  the  wine 
and  performed  the  sacrifice,  bring  to  him  in  his  labour, 
luminous  one,  an  ecstasy  wide  in  its  delight,  filling  the 
seeing  man  for  his  safeguard. 

14.  O  Fire,  as  we  have  done  with  our  hands,  with  our 
feet,  with  our  bodies  in  our  desire  of  thee,  like  men  who 
make  a  chariot  with  the  toil  of  their  two  arms,  so,  the  wise 
thinkers  have  laboured  out  the  Truth  and  possess  it.4 

15.  Now  may  we  be  born  as  the  seven  illumined  seers  of 
the  Dawn,  the  mother,  supreme  creators  creating  the 
Gods  within  us;  may  we  become  the  Angirasas,  sons  of 
Heaven  and  shining  with  light,  break  the  hill  that  has 
within  it  the  riches. 

16.  Now,  too,  O  Fire,  even  as  our  supreme  and  ancient 
fathers,  desiring  to  possess  the  Truth,  speakers  of  the 
word,  reached  the  very  purity,  reached  the  splendour  of 
the  Light;5  as  they  broke  through  the  earth  and 
uncovered  the  ruddy  herds. 


1  or,  commanded  the  seer,  they  upheld  him 

2  or,  wonderful 

3  or,  made  visible;  the  word  means  either  “visible”  or  “to  be  seen”. 

4  or,  desiring  to  possess  it. 

5  or,  entered  into  meditation  and  reached  the  very  purity; 


201 


Ilofcn  fedju  is  :kli  Jk  JHJaik  £jIdj£  fetfe^£ 

t  festal*  ik  i?e><*>  hikjksjk^  kjlfr.kfc  kile  ^  lkb 


11^  ill  :&k  Miaxunxm  fc£k£  £±fc£&  ikx£  Injhhihte 
l  :ikikk}  <ftjak&tettk2b  kkle  yihki  ^  kifele 


u? in  :^mi2iibk  kifej  kl  ks&tyskSkj  ikyiti 
iklkk  kMle  [h&h  kjkfe  kfefc  ne 


lie\ili  |u^h>jh  kali  kttSii  kiiskfe  ki^le  Jkikls 

I  lk^  k  jksjk±fck£  Ikkb  :i&l.tkfe£ 


a'HU  OIXSAJAI  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


17.  Perfect  in  action,  perfect  in  lustre,  desiring  the 
godhead,  becoming  gods,  they  smelted  and  forged  the 
Births  as  one  forges  iron,  flaming  with  light  they  made 
the  Fire  to  grow,  surrounding  Indra  they  reached  the 
wide  mass  of  the  Ray-Cows. 


1 8.  There  was  seen  as  if  herds  of  the  Cows  in  an  opu¬ 
lent  place,  that, which,  seen  near,  was  the  birth  of  the 
gods,1  O  Forceful  Fire;  they  both  illumined2  the  widenesses 
of  mortals  and  were  aspirants  for3  the  growth  of  the 
higher  being. 


19.  For  thee  we  worked  and  became  perfect  in  our 
works,  the  Dawn  shone  out  and  illumined  the  Truth; 
we  lit  the  unstinted  Fire  in  the  multitude  of  its  kinds,  in 
the  fullness  of  his  delight,  brightening  the  beautiful  eye 
of  the  Godhead. 


20.  These  are  the  utterances,  O  creator,  O  Fire,  we  have 
spoken  to  thee  the  seer,  in  them  take  pleasure.  Flame 
upwards,  make  us  move  full  of  possessions;  O  thou  of 
many  boons,  give  us  the  Great  Riches. 


1  or,  there  was  seen  like  herds  of  the  Cow  in  an  opulent  place  that 
which  is  near  to  the  birth  of  the  godheads, 

2  or,  achieved  the  wide  illuminations  of  mortals 

3  or,  .warriors  for  the  growth  etc. 


203 


t06 


llVill  MLth  kt  iMhSite 
I  :U1K  £BJ 


:BB  BsBJb  bisjB  BlBhj  lBife 
IBife  hthfej  BlBkB  kb)  1  Lb.it- 


11*11  B  |It  lbi>t»  iBJBh,  LBife  BJIElhBB  Lb.tE.  B  iBib 
I  :LbLtd;  BBJBBi£2  hiB3B  LbiB  BBS  Balk  )BBJ  Bi 


llfell  22£i±B  BBBB  1BJB  BBLh  BJB  BlBBhBiJiS  BiB£ 
I  :B£  iili^£2B6  BJ&BB  HBt  BlBbjile  BBttliUte 


Hill  :^BJS  itdbBi  £  £  Ubt%ya  BJ  <B£B>jb  :BlB^Bte 
I  :iBLfe£  Bib  bblH-  £  BB  B  lh$BS.BJ£B  BB 


n ^ II  BB3B.4  ^bhh^Bft>^jmfep4K>BJhB  li£  B^LS 
I  iJBiB^i  j*bh->P  >lPl£  2h  hilBiiBHbll  JB  lie 


£  ifck 


3-aiJ  OU.SAP'i  3HJ.  Ol  S\'IAIAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTA  3 

1.  Create  for  yourselves  the  King  of  the  pilgrim-rite, 
the  Terrible,  the  priest  of  the  invocation  who  wins  by 
sacrifice  the  Truth  in  earth  and  heaven,1  create  Fire 
golden  in  his  form  for  your  protection  before  the 
outspreading2  of  the  Ignorance. 

2.  This  is  thy  seat  which  we  have  made  for  thee,  even 
as,  desiring,  a  wife  richly  robed  for  her  lord;  thou  art 
turned  towards  us  and  wide-extended  around,  sit  here 
within:  O  once  far  distant  Fire,  these  are  fronting  thee, 
O  Fire,  perfect  in  wisdom. 

3.  O  ordinant  of  sacrifice,  to  Fire  that  hears,  inviolate, 
the  strong  in  vision,  the  happy,  the  immortal  Godhead 
speak  the  Thought,  the  word  expressing  him,  whom  I 
pray  as  with  the  voice  of  the  stone  of  the  pressing  when 
it  presses  out  the  honey-wine. 

4.  Thou,  too,  O  Fire,  turn  towards  our  labour,  be¬ 
come  aware  of  this  word,  in  perfect  answer  of  thy  thought, 
Truth-conscious,  become  aware  of  the  Truth.  When 
shall  there  be  thy  utterances  that  share  in  our  ecstasy, 
when  thy  acts  of  companionship  in  the  house? 

5.  How  dost  thou  blame  it,  O  Fire,  to  Varuna,  to 
Heaven,  what  is  that  sin  we  have  done?  How  wouldst 
thou  speak  of  us  to  Mitra,  the  bountiful,  how  to  earth? 
What  wilt  thou  say  to  Aryaman,  what  to  Bhaga? 


1  or,  who  worships  with  sacrifice  the  Truth  Tor  earth  and  heaven, 

2  or,  before  the  thunder-crash  from  the  unknown. 


al6 


205 


90S 


no  in  :BMsSJh  Ml  ads  ihk  ifejBB  V>pk>  (pippin? 
I  kfegaL  mrrh  :BiJi£  JJ±£  :PPPPi;jPhb  a±2  Ij  P^tb 


n'bll  ilihih  IBBh  IfthHIP'  IhPPjlb.  m]£4  UiH  llr,q$ 
I  Khbbh  BBtSah  IBB  1BI>\P  lie  ff>(PPhPJ  H3fe  P^b 


II7II  Plbi<bJb.fcJP^PIU>  (bbj  IhIP  hl>£  hPPjcjbb  PJK 
I  ;fali±teg»aJ>  bM  4J2  lfeib  PlPPiPi>P  h^PH;  iBib 


II6MI  Bill-:  %11S  BiB«b  :BB  JBi  Mbll>»P  blnibj  lib 
I  biyl  ftlfthfi  PISi>  kb  lnuh  f?»p?a]K  |h  ibsib 


ll^ll  BaB  bl»i>  P>P<P  :bfe  BJ  BltBBLB  BBSiJh 
I  Bhls  BfeBK  BiBIB  Bib  Btie  JB1HBB  SiBaafcsJ  kb 


ay  Id  01  ASA  I'M  3  HA  OX  S.'vKAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


6.  What,  O  Fire,  growing  in  thy  abodes,  wouldst  thou 
say  for  us,  what  to  the  wind  most  forceful,  to  the  seeker 
of  the  Good,  the  all-pervading,  to  the  lord  of  the  jour¬ 
ney,  to  the  earth?  What,  O  Fire,  to  Rudra  the  slayer  of 
men? 

7.  How  wilt  thou  speak  of  us  to  Pushan,  the  mighty 
bringer  of  increase,  what  to  Rudra  great  in  sacrifice, 
giver  of  the  offering?  What  seed  of  things  to  wide-striding 
Vishnu,  or  what,  O  Fire,  to  vast  doom? 

8.  How  when  they  question  thee  wouldst  thou  answer 
to  the  host  of  the  Life-Gods  in  their  Truth,  or  to  the  Sun 
in  his  vastness,  to  the  mother  indivisible,  to  the  swift 
traveller?  O  knower  of  all  things  born,  thou  knowest 
the  Heaven,  for  us  accomplish. 

9.  I  ask  for  the  truth  governed  by  the  Truth,  together 
the  unripe  things  of  the  Cow  of  light  and  that  of  her 
which  is  sweet  and  ripe,  O  Fire.  Even  black  of  hue,  she 
nourishes  with  a  luminous  supporting,  with  a  kindred 
milk.1 

10.  For  the  Fire  the  Bull,  the  Male,  is  inundated  with 
the  Truth,  with  milk  of  the  heights:  unstirred  he  ranges 
abroad  establishing  the  wideness,  the  dappled  Bull  has 
milked  out  the  bright  udder. 


1  The  Cow  (the  Vcdic  symbol  of  knowledge)  even  in  the  Ignorance 
where  it  is  black  still  nourishes  us  with  a  truth  which  is  still  luminous  and 
governed  by  the  Greater  Truth  which  is  hers  on  higher  levels  where  she  is  the 
radiant  Cow  of  Light. 


207 


llV>ill  IPIPPPPijli;  p  £  b->hP-  (>UlSJPnir£p  PP 

I  PI  HP  11£  :HJiJtiht  libii  Plk>J*k>  P>fr  iPkfc  JBithjil 


llxill  hPlPtelte  kpj  %i±  mi  iijl*  ^pV^p  pj  iia  PJ1S 
I  :bllnys  Pili£  rinmiJi.  JhMfti  XX  kiK  Un  mi 


Ilk  ill  imp.lhij  P>PP5>P  Iftip^pp.  p>>Sir-f  lh 
I  :hitt  (PPXtjK  n±  iu  |>&pjpp  tsx  M>fe  iia 


tiki  II  :fcdPP  PPPJI4  fettpttt  &  :klH&iJS  Mt&  k  IMP 
I  Pri’frjhhXt  JidiHJJM?  itfehle  mk^Pg  P^3£ 


Ili  ill  y±m  :te}lhftLhkpla  i_JJb  :lk  k& 

I  :kjyi  P±PP  JHiPSJhH  :P±PitJ  ppp=»  p|ip^p 


3HIJ  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


mandala  four 


11.  By  the  Truth  the  Angiras-seers  broke  the  hill,  they 
parted  it  asunder,  they  moved1  together  with  the  Ray- 
Cows;  men  sat  happily  around  Dawn,  the  Sun-world2 
was  manifested  when  the  Fire  was  born.3 

12.  By  the  Truth,  divine  immortal,  and  inviolate,  the 
Waters  with  their  honied  floods,  Fire,  like  a  steed  of 
swiftness  pressing  forward4  in  its  gallopings,  raced  ever 
on  to  their  flow. 

13.  Mayst  thou  never  passjover  to  the  Power5  of  one 
who  is  a  thief,  or  of  a  neighbour  or  one  intimate  who 
would  do  us  injury,6  mayst  thou  not  incur  the  debt  of  a 
brother  who  is  crooked,  may  we  not  suffer  by  evil  thought 
from7  friend  or  foe. 

14.  O  Fire,  strong  in  sacrifice,  protect  us  ever  guarding 
us  with  thy  keepings,  taking  pleasure  in  us;  burst  out  in 
flame,  break  the  strong  evil,  slay  the  (Rakshasa)  demon 
even  when  he  is  increasing  into  greatness. 

15.  O  Fire,  become  great  of  mind  by  these  hymns  of 
illumination,  by  our  thinkings  touch  these  plenitudes, 
O  heroic  flame,  so,  take  joy  in  the  words  of  knowledge, 
O  Angiras,  let  our  speech  expressing  thee  come  close 
to  thee,  enjoyed  by  the  gods. 


1  or,  came 

2  or,  the  Sun 

3  or,  in  the  birth  of  the  sun. 

4  or,  urged  forwards 

5  The  word  means  supernatural  or  occult  Power  which  captures  the 
force  of  Agni,  the  lord  of  Tapasya,  to  use  it  for  harm. 

6  or,  diminishes  us, 

«4i  ori  by  the  skill  of;  here,  again,  it  is  skill  in  an  occult  working,  or  an  occult 

and  hostile  direction  of  thought  that  is  feared. 


209 


oiz 


11x11  t  PPlrfete  £  Ifeib  ta  klkhjH  ajlXJS  ja  lb 

I  ^>P>PJ  PlPtaJte  IfcHjh'  pqpp  I1PK  <*iPj  fcli£ 


llfeliayifea  i>hjho  ^fejia  aitaie  Jb  jamais  ja  Jb 
I  :j&2£ie  it^x>  (jtpjT?ih  iaa,  jaainj£  aa  aj  uiJta  ajis 


n^ii  :i<*.4>iMbj  jsa  aj  jp^jaaiu-sah  i^Js  Htoaa 
i  iPhk  ala  PiP-»Ph  maas  aiatt  aa 


iUii  :gahjp»PBi>  iritj  pjip^sjpiiog  ajaja  aajaaa 
i  aa£  ipaippu  £jia  jfeaL  a  ajaps  :aih  aai&l 

8  'J& 


ii^h  :tek£  KPjHjpjht  aajab±jLi!£i!te  aa^  laaaaj 
i  ajiaa  h™pj  aibiiaja  jaa  a.t£  alaj  iasaj  iab 


33X1  OIXSAPV  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


mandala  four 


16.  Thus  have  I,  an  illumined  sage,  by  my  thoughts 
and  utterances  spoken  to  thee,  who  knowest,  O  Fire, 
O  creator,  secret  words  of  guidance,  seer-wisdoms  that 
speak  out  their  sense  to  the  seer.1 


SuKTA  4 

1.  Make  thy  mass  like  a  wide  marching,  go  like  a  king 
full  of  strength  with  his  following,  running  in  the  rapid 
passage  of  thy  march;  thou  art  the  Archer,  pierce  the 
demons  with  thy  most  burning  shafts. 

2.  Swiftly  rush  thy  wanderings;  blazing  up  follow 
and  touch  with  thy  violence;  O  Fire,  spread  by  thy 
tongue  thy  burning  heats  and  thy  winged  sparks; 
unleashed,  scatter  on  every  side  thy  meteors. 

3.  Swiftest  to  act,  spread  abroad  thy  scouts  to  their 
places,  and  become  the  indomitable  protector  of  this 
being:  he  who  would  bring  evil  by  speech  against  us  from 
afar  or  one  from  near,  let  not  any  such  bringer  of 
anguish  do  violence  to  thee,  O  Fire! 

4.  Arise,  O  Fire,  spread  out  towards  us,  consume  ut¬ 
terly  the  unfriendly,  O  sharp- missiled  Flame;  O  high- 
kindled!  whoever  has  done  enmity  against  us  burn  him 
down  like  a  dry  log. 


1  or,  all  these  in  my  thoughts  and  utterances  I  have  spoken  to  thee,  I, 
an  illumined  sage,  to  thee  the  knovvcr,  O  Fire,  O  creator,  words  of 
guidance,  secret  words,  seer-wisdoms  that  speak  out  their  meaning  to 
the  seer. 


211 


II '<.11  HiPiPk  (PiPP.^jP  ipA  kjSLhXk  :Jikh&  ikkkiSSyte 

|  U£  PPPjPPj|PP->PlhlP  hh>  hl%fe  iMt  U2i  M 


ll?ll  hk  P>b>lb  IhJIleM;  H-fSIl-rhPh  URl£  IP^lfeSfea 
I  :yi  PhJIPM*  IPIPIP  H  k  ky=iam  kjk£  H  hj^fete 


iis\ii  ippjfi  h-^frj  kill  fcjjaae  kt  iy&ysh} 

l  :kfc£  t  pk>pj  ip^ppipfi  :jukB  i±ie  p>p^ 


u^n  feys  jajjs  til  kj  iMtiikie  uux  lyikijS  a->iHkSfej 
l  p>p5ip  kj^k  yte|  Ji  ^pjb  pytS  P-jlPite  y  k 


llY>n  peis  ^ykk  K  pjikppjip'  ip^ik?  lXfeiJ  kte 

|  Pth^lhsP  Potr> i£->bMPP4l7il  fra. Pj  tjiS  ktt  |kii£ 

a>m  oixsah  am  ox  smimah 


MANDALA  FOUR 


5.  High-uplifted  be,  piercing  through  reveal  in  us 
the  things  divine,  O  Fire;  lay  low  what  the  demon  forces1 
have  established:  companion  or  single,  crush  the  foe. 

6.  He  knows  thy  right-mindedness,  O  youngest  of  the 
Gods,  who  hastens  the  journey2  for  the  Word  in  its  march. 
For  him  the  high  doer  of  works  has  made  to  shine 
about  his  doors  all  brightness  of  the  day,  all  treasures 
and  splendours  of  the  light. 

7.  May  he,  O  Fire,  be  fortunate  and  munificent  whg 
with  the  eternal  offering,  who  with  his  utterances,  seeks 
to  satisfy  thee  in  his  own  life,  in  his  gated  house;  may 
there  be  for  him  all  brightnesses  of  the  day,  may  such 
be  his  sacrificing.3 

8.  I  make  to  shine  thy  right  thought  in  me,  may  this 
word  diffused  in  its  peal  approach  close  to  thee.  Rich  in 
horses  and  chariots  may  we  make  all  bright  and  pure 
for  thee,  mayst  thou  hold  up  thy  mights  in  us  from  day 
to  day. 

9.  Here  in  this  world  should  one  largely  act  from  one’s 
self  in  the  presence  of  thee  as  day  by  day  thou  shinest  out 
in  morn  and  in  dusk:  right-minded  may  we  touch  thee 
as  we  play,  taking  our  stand  on  the  luminous  inspirations4 
of  men. 


1  or,  demon  impulsions 

2  or,  who  drives  the  path 

3  or,  may  all  that  sacrifice  of  his  be  bright  in  its  days. 

4  or,  luminous  energies 


213 


flZ 


mV)  ^  ii  kabi?  kiusJij  jbtj  khiiiih  :Btei  miiks 
I  bibb  bibbite  Wbi  i^jis  bbbj  ltekJB  bjtte  b  lbte 


Ilxill  lolh£Mn$  ino^cpiphW  bkb  IBIS  lb£ 
I  ktelb  hiteh^lnK  bPilP^ifafeB  bb  JLbbi 


ll^ll  ^JLb  JbfciJ  ks  bibabj  l£%feSb}  IbMb  bib  tell 
i  k&ij&ibxjl  bite  ib±b£h  kite  ^  n^jim  ibbix  b 


ItUll  ihbblh  :k  bb  biSiBbbJ  Ibbbteb  :bbih  b 
I  :i£aBjJsie  i<Wfc>*nms*Pte  inj?S 


II U H  :ik±i  IbbS  ffiabjbb^  gpbJfeSJlibb  bite  lb  kk 
I  hih^pihPjpfchj  m±bib}lbb  ibbib  hjlteft  ^Jtt 


llo^u  Phltete  bbblhhabjlte  bib  ibib  bib  HJbb  IbJLb  bib 
I  bbl  lbh-kfe  bjibbb  kite  IbnikjB  :b£bi  lbiib 


•IUIJ  OIXSAW  XHX  OX  SNWAII 


X^ANDALA  FOUR 


10.  He  who  comes  to  thee,  O  Fire,  with  strong  horses, 
with  fine  gold,  with  his  chariot  full  of  riches,  thou  be- 
comest  his  deliverer,  his  friend  and  comrade, — he  who 
takes  joy  in  thy  uninterrupted  guesthood. 

11.  I  break  great  ones  by  my  words,  by  my  friendship 
with  thee;  that  came  down  to  me  from  Gotama,  my  father: 
domiciled  in  the  house  do  thou  become  conscious  of  this 
word  of  ours,,  O  youngest  God !  O  priest  of  the  call !  O 
strong  Will! 

12.  Undreaming,  ever  in  movement,  blissful,  un¬ 
drowsing,  untorn,  untired  may  thy  guardian  powers  sitting 
linked  together  guard  us,  O  thou  untouched  by  igno¬ 
rance,  O  Fire! 

13.  Thy  guardian  powers,  O  Fire,  which  protected  the 
son  of  Mamata  from  evil,  for  they  saw  and  he  was  blind, 
omniscient  guarded  them  in  their  good  work;  the  foe 
who  w,ould  have  hurt  them  could  not  hurt. 

14.  By  thee  as  thy  companions,  guarded  by  thee,  by 
thy  leading,  may  we  win  the  plenitudes;  impel  to  their 
way  both  annunciations,  O  builder  of  Truth:  straight 
away,  confident,  create. 

15.  With  the  fuel  may  we  do  thee  worship,  O  Fire, 
accept  the  hymn  which  we  utter,  burn  the  demons  who 
speak  not  the  word  of  blessing,  guard  us  from  the  doer 
of  harm,  from  the  censurer  and  his  blame,  O  friendly 
Light! 


215 


912 


HV.njsiytt.il  ujjtii£i±ih  s>£  itHie  yitH  laihih 

cit^S  yibift  i*  ihi^jh  ycijjb  k  yiamie 


Hxn  JlijJtk  itid%  ijifebj  iUKJ  Jsife  aiinlX  h  is 

I  :ihJl£  :i2  mjfejm  k2ahJJli^si£;i±iJ^  kiltaHyK:  m  is 


nfen  knyihifejte  la  j&tj±±p±iltyiy  IMthiy*  k  kh 
I  Hhnfrjfoktafr  :?qjH.h>PJ  £jl±  ^£.2J  klB 


nfcii  :tijjE  jli2  jiijrt  lxaaj  yjjttK  y±iL  aiMh 

i  kamai  ajaih  \>.k  mi  xjtx  j^jtt  jj*£  a  K»^hj  in 


iiiii  :ayi  aajhiautai  bitidtsa  iala  take 
i  ;m  ill  atuaifiii  ia<t  nayea  alsyt  juiMaia 

v,  m 

311X1  OIXSAJ-M  3HX  OX  SNIMAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTA  5 

1.  How  should  we  give,  one  in  our  joy  in  him,  vast  in 
light,1  to  the  bounteous  Universal  Fire?  With  his  vast 
and  ample  upbearing  he  props  up  the  firmament  like  a 
pillar. 

2.  Blame  not  him  who  in  his  self-law  has  given  this 
gift,  divine  to  me  the  mortal,  the  wise  to  the  ignorant, 
the  immortal,  the  wide  in  consciousness,  the  most  strong 
and  mighty  Universal  Fire. 

3.  In  his  twofold  mass2  may  the  puissant  Bull  with  his 
thousandfold  seed,  with  his  keen  blaze  discovering  the 
great  Possession,  the  deeply  hidden  seat  of  the  Cow, 
declare  to  me  that  Mind  of  wisdom. 

4.  May  the  Fire  sharp-tusked  with  his  most  burning 
flame  of  light,  he  who  is  full  of  felicity,3  consume  them, 
they  who  impair  the  domain  of  Varuna  and  the  beloved 
and  abiding  things  of  Mitra  the  conscious  knower. 

5.  Going  they  go  on  their  way  like  women  who  have 
no  brothers,  like  wives4  with  evil  movements  who  do  hurt5 
to  their  lord,  sinful,  and  untrue  and  full  of  falsehood 
they  have  brought  into  being  this  profound  plane. 


1  or,  shining  with  the  light  of  the  vast, 

2  or,  force 

3  or,  he  who  is  ever  happy  in  achievement, 

4  or,  mothers 

6  or,  deceive 


217 


o^u  :]nahyi  kh  b±Jl£  ^ih  foqftui 

I  :k£h  kit  Put+cimtt  :^thj  :klhJS  tie 


U'bll  k>?h>  iMt  kUSJt  bJK:  ^  6*£3fe 

I  :y*  ida  pp-p  ihiajSh  it\M±lkbt  B}h±M  ht£ 


ll?U  kh  ME  \hk  MiJ  J^ih  kh  fe>Jlb  hHllnlhl4)?h 
I  p»Jt>b  i.irjpj  hkP^j  Mt  tile  ^  ‘.ttfe  tkibfc 


II6MI  fritep'  Philip  hi  hihkh  kit  hjlkkt  hitli 
|  ■lbf>Pj^t  (Ppfi  IP>»fc  pjppihp  IPhft  frt^itkjk 


ll^ll  fiihP-'P  ihhls  2ah  j^KLt  lkth  bibb  kkh 
I  hih  k  kit  kk  ^kh^hfehih  MJg  ^  bi 


SHIJ  OIXSAJ-V  3HX  OX  SMl-MAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


6.  For  me  who  howso  small,  impair  not  the  heavy 
burden  of  this  thought,  O  purifying  Fire,  uphold  with 
the  violence  of  thy  delight  this  vast  and  profound  and 
mighty  sevenfold  plane1. 

N 

7.  Him,  now  may  the  purifying  Thought  reach  and 
possess  by  the  will,  like  attaining  to  its  like;  in  the  move¬ 
ment2  of  the  peace,  over  the  form  of  the  dappled  Mother 
figured  out  on  the  summit  in  its  might  and  its  beauty. 

8.  What  of  this  word  do  they  say  to  me,  what  that  has 
to  be  declared  and  is  mysterious  and  hidden  in  the 
secrecy?3  What  was  as  if  a  covering  defence  of  the  rays4 
they  have  uncovered, — he  guards  the  beloved  form,  the 
summit  plane  of  the  being5. 

9.  This  which  is  that  great  front  of  the  Great  Ones  to 
which  as  its  supreme  place  adheres  the  shining  Cow,  he 
came  to  know  flaming  in  the  plane  of  the  Truth,  hastening 
in  its  speed  in  the  secrecy.6 

10.  Now  shining  in  union  with  the  two  Parents,  close 
to  him,  he  perceived  the  beautiful  and  secret  abode  of  the 
dappled  Cow.  There  was  the  tongue  of  the  Bull  of  flame 
intent  on  its  action,  it  was  near  the  Cow  of  Light,  in  the 
supreme  plane  of  the  Mother. 


1  or,  plane  with  its  seven  layers. 

2  or,  the  action 

3  or,  cave? 

4  or,  the  shining  Cows 

6  or,  the  Bird. 

6  or,  cave. 


219 


ozz 


nun  kyate  lkll  kkjiSJ  :klkk  klik 

l  lie  j±k  jbytUftfe  b^Pibhjp  kty  kite 


Uxiti  iwik>  klfckikkkkk  i^Hj^hj  tus  ^  ihle 

I  :mhPIPh$  PIP^PK  IPkk  In^kjlE 


Ufeill  :HlhP-PPP  tint  JXk  :ykh  h^Ph>.^  *k  liife 
I  kfrlb  k  |Pfct>  k^tlt  l^akklfc  jHfe  lkkk  1^1  bit  life 


Ukill  hiiiJte  ipi^pJ  k  kb  kile  ykk  kkh  :kkslMt 
|  klb^feJb.fcj^PIP'  |b(b  Jk  kj  kii  2ife  jnkj-g  k£j£  Jk  Jfej 


II HU  kihsbjh  kk  kkjk  Ik  kjkj  kkk)  £k  kjkte  kikki 

I  kfe^bb  (&^PIlT>  tkltelbP^klkfr.<Ba.h  ikitk  %Jk  k3fe 


a-au  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


11.  Asked  with  obeisance  I  voice  the  Truth,  this  which 
I  have  won  by  thy  declaring  of  it,1  O  knower  of  all  things 
born;  thou  possessest  all  this  that  is,  the  treasure  which  is 
in  heaven  and  that  which  is  on  the  earth. 

12.  What  is  the  treasure  of  this  Truth,  what  the  delight 
of  it,  wholly  declare  to  us,  O  knower  of  the  births,  for  thou 
art  aware.  That  supreme  plane  in  the  secrecy  which  is 
the  highest  goal  of  our  path,  which  is  over  and  above  all, 
that  we  have  reached,  free  from  bondage. 


13.  What  is  its  boundary,  its  manifestation  of  know¬ 
ledge,  what  the  joy  of  it  towards  which  we  must  move  like 
gallopers  towards  the  plenitude?  When  have  the  divine 
Dawns,  wives  of  the  immortal,  woven  it  into  shape  by  the 
hue  of  light  of  the  sun? 


14.  Those  who  live  undelighted  with  the  word  that  is 
languid  and  scanty,  narrow  and  dependent  on  their 
belief,  what  now  and  here  can  they  say  to  thee,  O 
Fire?  Uninstrumented  let  them  remain  united  with  the 
unreal. 

15.  For  the  glory  and  beauty  of  the  Bull  in  his  high 
burning  the  flame-force  of  the  master  of  riches  glowed  in 
its  splendour;  clothing  himself  with  brilliance  in  his  form 
of  perfect  vision,  he  has  shone  out  full  of  many  boons  like 
a  dwelling  with  its  treasure. 


1  or,  by  thy  wish. 


al7 


221 


zzz 


llVjii  W-tEfr  ikkk.  ifctfrj  P-»hk  kfeys  k  ^kkjik  irt.te'.kS 
I  Ibip-Ut  ippph  ikXtktjSiklJ*  kJ^Skkj  lkfap  IJh 


11*11  :im>  P  kkjJs  kjk2akjkj  lkii  k  ihkh  :ki|kh 
I  Pib^fr  4kdkkkkk3ls  Jka£  ikiK  klkkjk  kjSjk  k^ki 


Ufcll  :kk£  :khj£  Pijkfr  |Pth  :>hik  Ik 

I  :if»l>kPj)Pfc^>  kajtejkis  1MPK  ikkjll  jJnkS  lkfc 


llb.ll  kk  hlklkki  kk  Jak%^lkkk|k  klk  ks£ 

I  :IPPK  hP>Pj  (S>HP>jP-»PJ  frjlktv  ik^  JiitK 


nlw  klhikk  kJXkJ  kkSJkhk  is  k±k  kJUtkkSkJ  %  te? 

I  PlPjP'P  IPIPP^  SakJ  P>>P(£  k±±k.'iK  iin  h  i£  ks!£ 


a'HIi  OIXSAIX  3H1  OX  S.MKAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTA  6 

1.  O  Fire,  summoner  priest  of  the  pilgrim-rite,  stand 
up  very  high  for  us,  strong  for  sacrifice  in  the  forming  of 
the  gods :  thou  art  the  ruler  over  every  Thought  and  thou 
carricst  forward  the  mind  of  thy  worshipper. 

2.  Free  from  ignorance,  Fire,  the  rapturous  priest  of 
the  Call  has  taken  his  seat  in  creatures,  the  conscious 
thinker  in  their  findings  of  knowledge.  He  enters  into  a 
high  lustre  like  a  creator  Sun,  like  a  pillar  he  makes 
his  smoke  a  prop  to  heaven. 

3.  A  luminous  force  of  giving,  swift  and  put  forth  into 
action,  he  widens  the  formation  of  the  gods  as  he  turns 
round  it;  new-born  he  stands  up  high1  like  an  arrow- 
shaft  well-planted  and  firm2  and  shows  by  his  light  the 
herds. 

4.  When  the  sacred  grass  is  strewn  and  kindled  burns 
the  flame,  the  leader  of  the  pilgrim-rite  stands  up  to 
high  rejoicing  in  his  work;  Fire,  the  priest  of  the  call,  like 
a  guardian  of  the  herds  thrice  moves  round  them,  the 
Ancient  of  days,  ever  widening  his  circle. 

5.  He  goes  round  in  his  self-motion  with  measured  run, 
Fire,  the  rapturous  priest  of  the  call,  sweet  of  word,  pos¬ 
sessing  the  Truth;  his  flames  gallop  like  horses,  all  the 
worlds  are  in  fear  when  he  blazes. 


1  Greek:  akra . 

2  or,  a  sun-beam  fixed  and  constant.  Or,  it  may  possibly  mean,  a  pole, 
p  banner  well-planted  and  firm  he  shows  (the  place  of)  the  herds. 


223 


IlHlI  Utelhkte  kj  JJakt  k^KAtkl^ 

I  :ih  iL-tS  Mkkjl*  IJl&te 


Ho ^ ||  :hi£  k  kklh  |kkkakll  .tele  (Plhkkfe  k  JklkfcS 
I  lkjlkitekte  kite  JHlfc^itelkte  Iklklk  B  hi  £  k 


ll^ll  :lkiJ5  p^kpjipp^  ite  iatek  Utlteite 

I  n^e &  :ixcpx'Ht  mp£j(>  ikikk  |P>J^  kite  te  kk 


ll?H  WkfPj  ^  lka>  ids  k±k  k  Jktektekkk 

I  ietej  h^faklk  ki^te  1>ipp->  :>pippp  PP>*\te  feah  k£j 


II6HI  tek}  fa(hPik  »i»j»kj^g.kih 
I  ^okjkj  k  !>PhJI>klk  k 


:ktej£  k  UikJ  Ltete 
kite  k 


113.11  :fc  ite  hi  ^kikikikiki  k  p^>p  ltthkikjys  ^  kk  k 
l  :iik  kiinkkj  ^k  kil^a  kkk  k^kki  kite  p  h£k 


3HI.I  DI  AS  AN  3HX  OJ.  SMNAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


6.  O  Fire  of  the  fair  front!  happy  is  thy  vision;  even 
when  thou  art  terrible  and  adverse  great  is  thy  beauty: 
for  they  hem  not  in  thy  flame  with  the  darkness,  for  the 
destroyers  cannot  set  evil  in  thy  body. 

7.  He  is  the  begetter  of  things  and  his  conquest  cannot 
be  held  back,  not  even  the  father  and  the  mother  can 
stay  him  any  longer  in  his  impulsion.  Now  like  a  friend 
well-established,  the  purifying  Fire  has  shone  out  in  the 
human  peoples. 

8.  The  twice  five  sisters  who  dwell  together  have  given 
birth  to  the  Fire  in  the  human  peoples,  the  waker  in  the 
dawn,  like  a  tusk  of  flame,  brilliant  and  fair  of  face,  like 
a  sharp  axe. 


9.  Bay-coloured  are  those  horses  of  thine,  dripping 
light,  or  they  are  red,  straight  is  their  motion,  swift  is  their 
going,  males,  ruddy-shining,  straight  and  massive,  great 
in  their  deeds  they  are  called  to  our  forming  of  the  Gods. 

10.  These  are  thy  rays,  O  Fire,  that  put  forth  over¬ 
whelming  force,  moving,  impetuous  in  their  blaze,  they 
move  towards  the  goal  like  hawks  in  their  action,  with 
many  voices  of  storm  like  an  army  of  the  life-god. 

11.  O  high-kindled  Fire,  the  Word  has  been  formed 
for  thee,  one  voices  the  utterance,  one  sacrifices, — now 
ordain :  men  set  the  Fire  within  as  the  priest  of  the  call, 
making  to  him  their  prostration  of  surrender,  aspirants 
to  the  self-expression  of  the  human  being. 


225 


923 


ll^tl  kkfej£lij£  ilk  kM  fc&J 

i  kasjHi^  ne  nia  Man  nya=iis  n 


UV,||  :njj±ife  MU  £ateji2  frfc^^felb  Mi 
I  ^Ejfa  kj  PlP^JP-j  ittikuxiua^  |itk 


llxll  gtejl&y  jMfeiat  (fcfrihf^  :kl£  lie 

|  Hj>(jr»hP.th  IPtPJ  jPP^PPJ  kl  mis 


llfell  kihi  ilkifeil  IMitolilhfefrtej 
I  :kjP4  Phjita  |P^hth  pp^pj  PIPIP>- 


llhtl  HP- S  I  PS  PI  IHIPH  ir+jltk:  1M  %  IMS 

i  pppp  p^  kklt  ankle  n  iMs  nae 


Hill  majmy  teifej  kJaJ  MitetkikJ  IMtk  IN  PM  bit 
i  :&£^M^Mie  jaatejn  lujkykn  njin  ktjnie 


g\ 


HUM  DIX  SAM  HH1  O.T.  SNIVAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTA  7 

1.  This  is  he  who  was  established  as  chief  and  first 
by  the  Founders  of  things,  the  priest  of  the  call,  most 
strong  for  sacrifice,  to  be  prayed  in  the  pilgrim-rites, — he 
whom  the  doer  of  works  and  the  flame  seers1  set  shining 
wide  in  the  forests,  rich  in  light,  all-pervading,  for  man 
and  man. 

2.  O  Fire,  when  shall  the  conscious  waking  of  thy 
godhead  become  uninterrupted?  For,  now  mortals  have 
laid  hold  on  thee  as  one  desirable  in  human  creatures. 

3.  For  they  see  thee,  possessor  of  the  Truth  and  wide 
in  knowledge  like  waking  heaven  with  its  stars,  the  smile 
of  light  of  all  these  pilgrim-sacrifices  in  house  and  house, — 

4.  The  swift  messenger  of  the  illumining  Sun  who 
comes  to  all  the  seeing  people;  men  hold  him  as  the 
ray  of  intuition  and  he  shines  as  the  Bhrigu-fiame-scer 
for  each  being. 

5.  This  is  the  priest  of  the  call  whom  they  set  within, 
who  uninterruptedly  wakes  to  knowledge,  rapturous 
with  his  purifying  flame,  most  strong  to  sacrifice  by  his 
seven  seats.2 

6.  Him  in  the  many  mothers  linked  together,  wide¬ 
spread  and  unapproached  in  the  forest,  abiding  in  the 
secret  Cave  and  rich  with  many  lights,  full  of  knowledge 
or  moving  to  some  unknown  goal. 


1  Apnavan  and  the  Bhrigus 

2  or,  with  his  seven  lights. 


227 


nail  feilj  gbtetfe  k  ftlKplftbj  Hfcb  biblb 

I  :j±l}i?  pfr.g  P$  hP  ±&bb  IlnhP  IKfrh  bb 


1)0^11  :k±J£  bj  ^bb  IKSp]  l>K>p[  iQuvj  taPPmbtPJ  Pbjlftp 
I  :bjm  PJI»PH>  mj-fe  bibb  ^bbliabb  n4Pi^  y^b 


ll'bll  :b2  Ilbbb  \Plt**bXJEb  ±Ujt  1  bbb  iP^KSb 
'  |  kb^tjlhfobjbrrbjbtlh  :bJ£i  hh  b  bail 


ll?ll  bJlbhJXbte  bbj  UialbJ  ynllb  bbjb  }ib|  bk 
I  blbXfrjbjb  ibbJX  Ibbs  bblbbj  PjifpS  bilbaib 


lieMi  iblbbbjbb  bl>bV>^  <b=.$Pi>  ipppu>jk>  lib 
I  :lb£  biblal  bblb  bibbbbbijb  iPftpj  kb  bibb 


HbH  DIXSAI-V  3HA  OX  SNJWH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


7.  When  in  the  separation  from  sleep  the  Gods  have 
joy  in  that  udder  of  the  Cow,  in  the  plane  of  the  Truth, 
great  becomes  the  Fire  by  the  offering  given  with  pros¬ 
tration  and  journeys  for  the  pilgrim-sacrifice  and  the 
Truth  is  ever  with  him. 

8.  He  journeys  knowing  the  embassies  of  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice  between  both  the  firmaments,  utterly  awakened 
to  knowledge.  A  messenger,  the  Ancient  of  days,  ever 
widening,  ever  greater  in  knowledge,  thou  travellest 
the  mounting  slopes  of  heaven.1 

9.  Black  is  the  path  of  thy  shining,  thy  light  goes  in 
front,  a  journeying  ray,  the  one  supreme  of  all  thy  bodies; 
when  one  unimpregnated  bears  thee  as  the  child  of 
her  womb,  in  the  sudden  moment  of  thy  birth  thou  art 
already  the  messenger. 

10.  The  moment  he  is  born  his  might  becomes  visible 
when  the  wind  blows  behind  his  flame;  he  turns  his 
sharp  tongue  round  the  trunks  and  tears  his  firm  food 
with  his  jaws  of  flame. 

11.  When  quickly  he  carries  his  foods  on  his  rapid 
tongue,  this  mighty  Fire  fashions  himself  into  a  swift 
messenger;  consuming  all  he  clings  to  the  mad  course2 
of  the  wind,  as  a  driver  a  swift  horse  he  sets  it  to  gallop 
for  the  seeker  of  the  plenitude. 


1  or,  thou  travellest  to  the  inmost  places  of  heaven, 
or,  to  the  roar 


\ 


229 


II7II  iyie  I  kUaUSSdh  UiJali  jHJnhKKfeJ  & 


II6MI  ttUA|  mteUs  Jiiie  I  :^iik£  6±i^  H  ^ 

11^,11  :fel  ^&JS  UuK  fc  I  ^anjls  SJ  yimmi  :tojfe£  y  Uili  y 

UV,U  yml  P-^K  I  £  I  :itjMjl£Ji2Mkl££  frbde  h  Mb*  y 

llji.ll  :bij  kfaywe  *2JaJ  I  yirfrlfrte  lfeiifejjy  biS  ly  a 

0 

ii£u  6^  kfej  mjimsj  yys  i  ys  yMPT*  ms  htkiie  sy  sy  & 

•  ^ 

nfeti  lytsfe  my  &  i  :tyj  fafeyaJK  i&i  yy#fe  i^y  ^  a 

|| ill  m»j  ^U'-ckQiH'jh  I  kmithliJSSaB  iiSSSSSJ  m  yl 

? 

a'aii  ollsaw  hhj.  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTA  8 

1.  Array  with  your  word  the  messenger,  the  carrier 
of  your  offerings,  most  strong  to  sacrifice,  the  omniscient, 
the  Immortal. 

2.  For,  he  knows  the  place  of  the  possession  of  the 
riches,  he  knows  the  ascending  slope  of  heaven,  he  shall 
bring  here  the  gods. 

3.  A  God,  he  knows  for  the  seeker  of  the  Truth  his 
way  of  submission  to  the  gods  in  the  house  of  Truth, 
and  he  gives  the  beloved  treasures. 

4.  He  is  the  priest  of  the  call,  it  is  he  who  travels 
between,  aware  of  his  embassy  knowing  the  ascending 
slope  of  heaven. 

5.  May  we  be  of  those  who  have  given  to  the  Fire 
with  the  gift  of  their  offerings,  who  kindle  him  and 
increase. 

6.  They  by  the  treasure,  by  the  hero-strengths  have 
conquered  and  have  heard  who  have  upheld  their  work 
in  the  Fire. 

7.  In  us  may  the  riches  move  from  day  to  day  bringing 
the  multitude  of  our  desires,  may  we  receive  the  impul¬ 
sion  of  the  plenitudes. 

8.  An  illumined  seer,  by  the  might  of  seeing  human 
beings  he  pierces  beyond  like  a  swift  arrow. 


231 


II7II  rbSsib  HJISi  bb  l  :bb£i?j  labile  ibiSJbi  JbSi  ^  ijb 
uevii  kfe£  ysiolii  jfeuiiie  i  :ibj£bi*b  ^ibatibibaji*  Jfeuaie 
ll^ll  Ir^Ph  b2^  I  klb?J£  ifrlbfe  bib  bib 


llVktt  kliaibblb  b  lbal 


1  hi  bibb 


nxii  Jty^ya  but£b  b£  1  %bbjhMt  jbb  ibaibijis  ibi  bb 


|i*n  ujbih  bj  li^h  b£  l  biajbpy  JJbb  rn^  ^nya  i^h  bb  b 


Mill  fcbb  JbfeibJ  yj]|  I  :h^>^b!K  febj  byabifct  b 

Mill  bbbbljb  bb£  1  bbb  bb^  ib|  b  i^ie  l£b  22b  bbe 

>) 


3  3  Id  DIXSAW  3HX  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTR  9 

1.  O  Flame,  be  gracious,  for  great  art  thou  who 
comest  to  the  seeker  of  the  godheads  to  sit  on  his  seat 
of  sacrifice. 

2.  He  becomes  manifest  in  human  beings,1  invincible,2 
immortal,  the  messenger  of  all. 

3.  He  is  borne  round  the  house,  a  rapturous  priest 
of  the  call  in  our  heavenward  urges;  he  takes  his  seat 
as  the  priest  of  the  purification. 

4.  The  Fire  is  the  Goddess-powers  in  the  pilgrim-rite 
and  he  is  the  master  of  the  house  in  his  home,  he  sits 
too  as  the  priest  of  the  word. 

5.  Thou  comest  to  the  offerings  as  the  speaker  of  the 
sanction  for  human  beings  when  they  would  perform 
the  pilgrim-sacrifice. 

6.  Thou  comest  to  be  his  envoy  to  him  in  whose  sacri¬ 
fice  thou  takest  pleasure  to  carry  the  offerings  of  the 
mortal. 

7.  Take  pleasure  in  our  pilgrim-rite,  in  our  sacrifice,  O 
Angiras,  hear  our  call. 

8.  Let  thy  invincible  car  reach  us  and  move  round  us 
on  every  side  by  which  thou  guardest  the  givers  of  the 
offering. 


1  or,  he  becomes  in  human  beings  a  protector, 

2  or,  indestructible, 


233 


Itftll  rblESIblhlM?  ItXS 
1  ppk  lajjbS  btsyal  itj-bii  iha  bi£ 

ll^ll  :blbfei  bl^l  b  *bl&  ^ 

I  kb„>^j  fcjtt  Mh^VbP  b£  b  bt 


llVitl  »felhP>  biyib  Jhfek  tty 

iki  MLfebJ  l£XJ2yib  Ksl^EJlfel  bb 


11*11  Mhife  byhbbi  b  tttj  ^  hs 

I  kifcis  u>c:|P-»if.hkj\lt  J^le  2abjm 


IlfeU  :a4bielbh£  :bj%ibj  bile 
l  :jyjt£  kti  yi  )frK.fele  jbbjii 


Hill  febb  Jblt  bib^bl 
I  :|k»k  (rmfr  h->Sky>te  bill  lble 


ll^ll  :|ye  b  ibiha3b 
I  Wn&>»j%  £b  b  b!fe  :H^  b  fe^lEhb  bile 

o'* 


3313  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SUKTA  10 

1.  O  Fire,  let  us  today  make  thee  affluent  with  our 
lauds  as  thy  vehicles  to  bear  thee, — even  that  of  thee 
which  is  as  if  the  Horse,  as  if  a  happy  will  touching 
the  heart. 

2.  For  now,  O  Fire,  thou  hast  become  the  charioteer  of 
a  happy  Will,  of  an  all-accomplishing  Discernment,  of  the 
Vast  Truth. 

3.  Become  close  to  us,  O  Fire,  by  these  hymns  of 
illumination,  right-minded  with  all  thy  flame-powers, 
thy  light  like  the  sun- world. 

4.  Today  uttering  thee  with  these  utterances  may  we 
give  to  thee,  O  Fire;  thy  strengths  thunder  forth  like  the 
heavens.1 

5.  Most  sweet  is  thy  vision,  now  in  the  day,  now  in 
the  night;  it  shines  out  close  to  us  like  gold  for  its  beauty 
and  splendour. 

6.  Free  from  evil  is  thy  body;  it  is  like  pure  clarified 
butter,  it  is  pure  gold ;  that  in  thee  is  golden  in  its  shining, 
for  such  is  thy  self-law. 

7.  Even  the  lasting  hostility  done,  O  thou  who  possess- 
est  the  Truth,  thou  drives t  away  perfectly  from  the  mortal 
sacrificer.2 


1  or,  like  the  strength  of  heaven. 

2  or,  away  from  the  mortal  who  is  exact  in  his  sacrifice. 


235 


Ilxll  ifeiE  kke  It 
I  :hal£ikk 


itrt^taj  ^nusiife  ysife  ktei 


(Ifell  hjlHh  tdiii  fctejlfcil  Uihilk  lakj£  kj^ik 
I  ljlfry>»  P-‘MU'  IbfeSb^lki^k^^  llr>l<*>  P>frt^ 


ll'cll  tt±h  i^h  (Skfi  ppi>  Jiikikfe  adk  :kkJJs  kktj%5kj 
I  :mbP->  PlU'Pjfc  Ifth^  iit  JJalkk  ^ioL  htlllk  k| 


mil  Wk.H>  kat  lie  15.1  k%kkkj  JLbkfek  Jifei  J5£  k!5k 
I  jp>h&  He  frihh’frlPftkJ^k  tile  ^  £k 


n  m 


II7II  kfekliijk  kkk  :hjlk  Jk  Ik 
I  ^ak  Ja£|  kiSliilit  £±k  !*•>?>  p  :k  ikiy 


3313  OliSAJAI  3 Hi  Oi  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


8.  O  Fire,  auspicious  may  be  all  our  friendship  and 
brotherhood  with  you  Gods.  That  is  our  centre,  where 
is  our  home,  where  is  that  udder  of  the  Cow  of  Light. 


Sukta  11 

1.  Happy  is  that  flame-power  of  thine,  O  forceful  Fire; 
it  shines  close  to  the  Sun,  glowing  to  vision  it  is  seen  even 
in  the  night,  it  is  as  if  in  its  beauty1  there  were  an  unarid 
feast  for  the  eye. 

2.  O  Fire,  O  thou  with  thy  many  births,  even  as  we 
hymn  thee  force  open  the  heavens2  with  thy  quivering 
lustre3  for  him  who  utters  the  mind  of  wisdom;  O  Brilli¬ 
ant,  O  glorious  flame,  what  thou  with  all  the  gods  hast 
won,  that  give  to  us,  that  mighty  thought. 

3.  O  Fire,  from  thee  are  born  the  seer- wisdoms,  from 
thee  the  mind  of  knowledge,  from  thee  the  utterances 
that  achieve;  from  thee  come  the  riches  that  take  the 
hero’s  form  to  the  mortal  giver  who  has  the  true  thought. 

4.  From  thee  is  born  the  steed  of  swiftness  that  carries 
the  plenitude,  that  has  the  force  of  Truth,  that  makes 
the  great  approach,  that  has  the  vastness;  from  thee  is 
the  treasure  sent  by  the  gods  that  creates  the  bliss,  from 
thee  the  rapid  speeding  war-horse,  O  Fire. 


1  or,  in  its  form 

2  or,  the  door  or  entrance 

3  or,  with  thy  lustre  of  knowledge 


al8 


237 


Ilxll  HltNbJ  Jhtetej  bjlbh?  kbibXbijte  Ifa&a  l&'Z 
I  ;iii^^aj<h  hjbjbjsibabjb  Uzhkh  %  £j.feajb 


llfell  Mbihfc->  iUitih  m*Jb  bbbj  bil  bjibi 

I  :hll  hihlh  h^bhiJSIlrtfttejte  :b£b  te\)bijte 


llhll  Mki+jfe^  Pfrb  bp.  bbaS  bJ.fateJbp  bjb  :blfcS  b 

i  bbxb  m^bte  tils  ^i±  jjhitetesa^atte  t*b  b*£ 


mil  blE^feJb-SJ^blte  ibite  bb  btebis  fofrtibtla  £  b 
I  bltebijb  Pfelnff  tete  bitej  k&bb  £bb£  Hhlbbh 

U  m 


ll^ll  bijbi  Jibb  bbj  ite  b%  b  bite  Jb&  :b£b  :btej  iblb 
I  bjlhfejb  b]bS  ibib}  Hte  £te  pbbjbbbite  pte 


llViii  katbbpMt  bbbbbjps  b^blbbj  ibbbyiS 
I  Wgpjtw*  bkte  pi±  b|  Jbibb£  btfeJS  bifalbi 


abU  OIXSAIAI  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


5.  Thee,  O  Fire,  O  immortal,  first  and  chief  of  the  god¬ 
heads  mortals  who  are  seekers  of  the  godheads  illumine 
by  their  thoughts,  Fire  with  the  rapturous  tongue  who 
pushest  away  the  hostiles,  the  one  domiciled  within,  the 
master  of  our  house  untouched  by  ignorance. 

6.  Far  from  us  all  unconsciousness,  sin  and  evil  mind 
when  thou  art  on  guard,  a  benignant  Power  in  the  night,  O 
Fire,  O  son  of  force,  over  him  to  whom  thou  cleavest 
for  his  weal. 


Sukta  12 

1.  He  who  kindles  thee,  O  Fire,  and  with  his  ladle  in 
action  creates  food  for  thee  thrice  in  the  day  may  he, 
awakened  to  knowledge,  be  ever  with  thy  illuminations 
and  wholly  put  forth  his  force  and  overcome  by  thy  will, 
O  knower  of  all  things  born. 

2.  He  who  labours  and  brings  to  thee  thy  fuel  serving 
the  flame-force  of  thy  greatness,  O  Fire,  he  kindling  thee 
every  day  and  night  ever  grows  and  cleaves  to  the  Trea¬ 
sure  slaying  the  unfriendly  Powers. 

3.  The  Fire  is  the  master  of  the  vast  might,  the  Fire  is 
master  of  the  supreme  plenitude  and  riches;  ever  young, 
faithful  to  his  self-law,  he  founds  wholly  uninterruptedly 
the  ecstasy  for  the  mortal  who  worships  him. 

4.  If  at  all  in  our  humanity  by  our  movements  of  igno¬ 
rance  we  have  done  any  evil  against  thee,  O  Fire,  make  us 
wholly  sinless  before  the  mother  indivisible;  O  Fire,  mayst 
thou  loosen  from  us  the  bonds  of  our  sins  to  every  side. 


239 


Ilxl I  :P'frh<E  tehx  JPhahJi 


I  Uih 


ufeii  wfo  Mbfcjfej  ishi  aMh  Piu  :±>ij£  pa  p 
i  khie  iwhtehie  liitshk  febfej  aaa  hten^mp  h 


llfell  wp^JHiapjfhS:  Hfc  Jpp)  Pijh  ynkfe  Ph  ke 
i  uph  k  paya  kL-shji  poS  k«ie  ipp  ipjya  put  p± 


Kill  H}h  IhPJlpX  Jh&  Pkajil  JP&6  IPPtjkPlh 
|  WbfctPV  IPafc  )P|PlkbJ 


\\  m 


H^H  :kfc  k  XPK  Whip  JS  :k22  iPh^kltifea  Jph 
I  nfcfrh  iPu-AhiPhj  Xjh  kfej  hUt  (pah  iiP  £  lfeh 


IIV^II  Up  &  MhPP  ump  lfiafc  ULIaiJ  k±}£H  :ht&U  p  U± 
I  mpy-Pk  PKiPib^  k^£  itlkie  Utkh  WfrhSjki 


a^IJ  OIXSAI-M  3HA  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FOUR 


5.  Even  though  our  sin  be  great  before  gods  and  men, 
even  though  it  be  wide,  O  Fire,  may  we  not  come  ever  to 
harm  from  it  who  art  thy  friends  and  comrades;  give 
to  our  Son,  our  begotten,  the  peace  and  the  well-doing. 

6.  Even  as  that  was  done  when  the  Masters  of  Riches, 
the  Lords  of  sacrifice  released  the  bright  cow  tethered  by 
her  foot,  so  release  us  utterly  from  evil;  mayst  thou  carry 
forward  our  fife  so  that  it  crosses  beyond,  O  Fire. 


Sukta  13 

1.  The  Fire  facing  the  front  of  the  dawns  as  they  shine 
out  has  revealed  the  founding  of  ecstasy;  the  two  Riders 
of  the  horse  are  coming  to  the  gated  house  of  the  doer  of 
good  works;  the  divine  Sun  is  rising  up  with  its  light. 

2.  The  divine  creator  Sun  has  reached  his  high  shining, 
he  is  like  a  warrior  seeker  of  the  Light  brandishing  his 
flag.  There  is  Varuna,  there  is  Mitra,  all  follow  the 
working  of  the  Law  when  they  make  the  Sun  to  rise 
up  in  heaven. 

3.  Him  whom,  firm  in  their  foundation,  never  ceasing 
from  their  aim  they  have  made  for  the  removing  of  the 
darkness,  this  Sun  seven  mighty  brilliant  mares  bear  as 
the  scouts  of  the  whole  world. 

4.  O  God,  thou  goest  with  steeds  most  strong  to  bear 
separating  the  weft  woven,  unweaving  the  black  garment; 
the  streaming  rays  of  the  Sun  cast  the  darkness  like  a 
covering  skin  down  within  the  waters. 


241 


ilV,li  W<*»iu  Pjih  :fekj  jfrfrfr  Jife  ihhfr->  pjih  ife>fe 

Ik  feS^JJ^i-Sik  feifeife  :fffekjK:  (PhlkK: 


llxll  Mfehklli  ilttfefe  Mi  khijie  U±Ui  blhbfeh  ik  %  J±S 
1423k  mfea  MMK  lfei  ^  ii  i2aljfe  ife  uk 


llfell  PI?S  hIDbjfc  |P;hhlfrK 

|  luimtj^fchjh&p  Ikfcj 


I \h\ I  :klPfrJ%SfejMji  Ibk  fej  t&XJkile  JkfeJhlfellS  ilSliS 
I  kfea£  feikkk  kifeikjkjjfeiktefc  lfek  Ikkjk  k%  k3i£ 


II ^ II  g^hPlh  ik  hM*fe  kkfel  ifelk^MMk  1JK 
I  :fej^l±  iklkkli  lk£  kfeMe  ikfekii*  yikkktJiM' 

a^  mt 


II  Vill  jttilk  Hjih  :kki±  :fe±iti  :fe£J.  i£kk  IX  lfekfei  kjlfe  lfei 
I  k  kEh  JBSjkmliSfei  feifeife  :SkkJJK  Jkfelkls 

sum  oixsapm  hhx  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  FOUR 


5.  Unextended,  unbound,  facing  downwards,  facing 
upwards,  how  does  he  not  sink?  By  what  self-law  does  he 
go  on  his  journey?  Who  has  seen  when  he  joins  heaven 
and  is  its  pillar  and  guards  the  firmament? 

Sukta  14 

1.  Fire,  the  godhead  has  been  revealed,  the  knower 
of  all  things  born,  fronting  the  dawns  as  they  gleam  with 
the  greatness  of  their  lustres;  wide-moving,  lords  of  the 
journey,  come  moving  in  their  chariot  towards  this  our 
sacrifice. 

2.  The  creator  Sun  is  lodged  in  his  high  Ray  of  intuition 
fashioning  the  light  for  the  whole  world;  the  Sun  in  his 
universal  knowledge  has  filled  earth  and  heaven  and 
the  mid-world  with  his  rays. 

3.  The  dawn  bearing  him  has  come  with  the  Light, 
dawn  vast  and  rich  in  her  lustres,  knowing  all  by  her 
rays;  the  divine  dawn  awakening  to  the  happy  path  is 
journeying  in  her  well-yoked  chariot. 

4.  May  these  horses  and  chariots,  strong  to  bear,  bring 
you  both  in  the  shining  out  of  the  dawn :  for,  here  for  you 
are  the  juices  of  the  Wine  for  the  drinking  of  the  sweetness; 
O  strong  Ones,  may  you  take  rapture  of  them  in  this  sacri¬ 
fice. 

5.  Unextended,  unbound,  facing  downwards,  facing 
upwards  how  does  he  not  sink?  By  what  self-law  does 
he  go  on  his  journey?  Who  has  seen  when  he  joins  heaven 
and  is  its  pillar  and  guards  the  firmament? 


243 


tlofcu  l  )±ha£§  in  >_Jl±i£  lbbSimb^  a 

\\\\\  :tmft  I  :te^in  :>lh?  lb  hh 

H?U  XX  IK'  &te  ipmi  I  b)to^it»  u>mh$  ixX  liasb  im  H£ 


I16UI  >♦>»*  mM  k  ISxie 
ll^ll  ^xjfexj  jamkh 
I|V)H  :b§2y±  mkiisluJbJ 
llxtl  imt-tfrbhjte  |i±£ 
llkll  msi»  bjimi  kteX 

ukii  k&  am  £i%s  jus 


I  :j2iikj±  :>lh?  lbiljl  jJaaBJa^ 


I  Mliifij  :my  k  k  k±kkk 


l  :mh  m  mie 


I  Hm.hjn  XlE,  mxdi  :b  me 


:pjhaia  ijx 


i  m^fei  immib  iteajtvganpsj  xih 


ll$ll  :najja  1%^  Jbi  I  HWk  ijh  kk  lt£Xb  ^mie  {b  jnj^mjie 


a-au  oiiSAJAi  ai-ix  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  FOUR 


SuKTA  15 

1.  The  Fire  is  our  priest  of  the  call  in  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice;  he  is  led  around  as  the  horse,  he  is  the  god¬ 
head  in  the  gods  who  is  lord  of  the  sacrifice. 

2.  The  Fire  goes  thrice  around  the  pilgrim-sacrifice 
and  is  like  one  driving  a  chariot,  he  founds  our  delight 
in  the  gods. 

3.  The  Fire  moves  around  the  offerings,  a  seer,  a  master 
of  the  plenitudes  and  founds  for  the  giver  the  ecstasies. 

4.  This  is  he  who  is  kindled  in  the  front  in  Srinjaya,  son 
of  Devavata,  he  is  luminous  and  a  destroyer  of  foes. 

5.  The  mortal  who  is  a  hero  can  have  mastery  over 
the  Fire  in  its  march,  the  sharp-tusked  bountiful  Fire. 

6.  They  make  him  bright  from  day  to  day  like  a  con¬ 
quering  war-horse,  like  a  shining  babe  of  heaven. 

7.  When  the  prince,  the  son  of  Sahadeva,  woke  me 
with  his  two  bay  horses,  though  called  towards  him  I 
was  not  ready  to  rise. 

8.  Even  so,  I  took  at  once  from  the  prince,  the  son  of 
Sahadeva,  those  two  sacred  horses  he  gave. 

9.  O  divine  Riders,  here  before  you  is  the  prince 
Somaka,  son  of  Sahadeva;  long-lived  may  he  be! 

10.  Even  him  the  prince,  the  son  of  Sahadeva,  O  divine 
Riders,  make  long  of  life. 


245 


MANDALA  FIVE 


I|V)||  MhUM?  ikmia  kj  IH^kiJStbib^  liki  kali 

llakfc  IMkaP^J  <k%  iMie  kie  2akp* 


ilxli  kiS  pii*  pis  jkts  >pfrj  ikia£  yi^fi 

i  ikj/Ji  &  h&  kyak&  ajikk  mnkfe  ifWtktjie 


HkH  :kl31W,htt  ^MkLt^kkMdk  yj&£fc  llnJSJS  kie 
I  :k±Jl±oyikpy]£  :lty£J±li±14i  fcikit 


niu  fejibHij  lkhkiks  kki  mih  itjkkisk  hifrkjii 
1  kJJRiikks  :iki±£  :ktjj£  ltaklkk  fcitefcfc  lkyi  fcjysle 


iiin  eikuak  pj  :wk  n  :iH$pjhiftte  k  k£  iMk 

I  kmMt^MkkJkh  kjis  iklkte  Itahjk  rbytaUsK: 

l 

^lyitbS 

bkfelK 


THE  ATRIS 


Budha  and  Gavishthira 
SuKTA  1 

1.  Fire  is  awake  by  the  kindling  of  the  peoples,  he 
fronts  the  dawn  that  comes  to  him  like  a  fostering  milch- 
cow;  like  the  mighty  ones  casting  upward  their  branching 
his  lustres  spread  towards  heaven. 

2.  The  priest  of  the  call  is  awake  for  sacrifice  to  the 
gods,  Fire  with  his  right  thinking  has  stood  up  high 
ablaze.  The  red-glowing  mass  of  him  is  seen :  a  great  god 
has  been  delivered  out  of  the  darkness. 

3.  When  he  put  out  the  long  cord  of  his  troop,  Fire  in 
his  purity  reveals  all  by  the  pure  herds  of  his  rays;  the 
goddess  of  understanding  is  yoked  to  her  works,  she 
supine  he  standing  high,  he  has  drunk  from  her  breasts 
with  his  tongues  of  flame. 

4.  The  minds  of  men  who  seek  the  godhead  converge 
towards  the  flame  even  as  their  seeings  converge  in  the 
sun ;  when  two  dawns  of  different  forms  give  birth  to  this 
Fire  the  white  Horse  is  born  in  front  of  the  days. 

5.  He  was  born  victorious  in  front  of  the  days,  estab¬ 
lished  in  established  things,  ruddy-bright  in  the  woodlands 
of  our  pleasure;  in  house  and  house  founding  the  seven 
ecstasies  the  Fire  took  up  its  session  as  a  priest  of  the  cal] 
strong  for  sacrifice. 


249 


052 


nan  nisxiyl  £(ttt>jP'bhth(b,h  kibj 

|  kP^kk  :kjPU-b  <?aPJ  kthP-»kklk.  IhkiH  fci  E1K 


nail  kSk  kit  lji±  kite  ^  P$b  PjApfcJ  Pjttfi  M2a£iJH  IIS 
I  Pl>%  P(k>  PP^jlt  kfkfrjb  <*ibjb  |bPH>J  P-j>k. 


H'bll  kllnpik^kbjPjklltbj  p>Kj  IkJJttfeJ  (boflb  pi±2| 

I  Wk£  IhP^IP-  frfrhbJIHlktateK:  kii?  jmi  b 


n?n  kib^iK  ik$k  k±K_  LfrtbJ  n^itwSk 

I  :k  ibiy  :fcjkjie  (P^i^Lbj.’b  :u±hX  fci  £b£ii 


IISMI  kkii  kkjlk  k-jlt'k  pikj  kipfc  lk^>  klPP^b  lie 
I  :itjysk  P^|k>lP^  ktptklk  k^.!±KiaJ  hd  In  JS 


n^n  Jttik  Pkik|?^  pih  lkl£te  2a:kjM>  :kjk>  lhk 

I  £  lhi£  :£lk  hkhklb|frb  bb^kb^  IP^ktjlf 


aau  oixsAiv  am  ox  snhah 


MANDALA  FIVE 


6.  Strength  has  taken  his  seat  as  the  priest  of  the  offer¬ 
ing  mighty  for  sacrifice  in  the  lap  of  the  Mother,  in  that 
rapturous  other  world,  the  youth,  the  seer,  manifold  in 
his  fixed  knowledge,  possessed  of  the  Truth,  the  upholder 
of  the  peoples;  in  between  too,  is  he  kindled. 

7.  Men  pray  with  their  prostrations  of  surrender  that 
illumined  seer,  who  achieves  perfection  in  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifices,  Fire,  the  priest  of  the  call,  for  he  has  extended 
earth  and  heaven  by  the  Truth,  they  rule  bright  with  the 
Light  the  eternal  Horse  of  power. 

8.  The  purifier  he  is  rubbed  bright  and  pure,  he  who  is 
proclaimed  by  the  seers,  one  who  is  the  dweller  in  his 
own  house,  and  is  our  benignant  guest;  the  bull  of  the 
thousand  horns  because  thou  hast  the  strength  of  That, 
O  Fire,  thou  precedest  in  puissance  all  others. 

9.  At  once  thou  goest  forward,  O  Fire,  and  overpassest 
all  others  in  whomsoever  thou  hast  become  manifest  in  all 
the  glory  of  thy  beauty;  adorable,  great  of  body,  wide  of 
light  thou  art  the  beloved  guest  of  human  beings. 

10.  To  thee,  O  ever  youthful  Fire,  all  the  worlds  and 
their  peoples  bring  the  offering  from  near  and  from  far; 
awake  to  that  right-mindedness  of  man’s  happiest  state: 
vast  and  great  and  happy  is  that  peace  of  thee,1  O  Fire. 

1 1 .  Today,  O  luminous  one,  mount  the  luminous  whole¬ 
ness  of  thy  car  with  the  lords  of  sacrifice,  thou  knowest 
the  wide  mid-world  with  all  its  paths,  bring  here  the  gods 
to  partake  of  our  sacrifice. 


1  or,  is  thy  house  of  refuge, 


251 


llVill  h£  Mh  Pjlk'lb^k'tt  ^  bVkbl*  |  ]2 

ih|j>  pih  khjyt  p-»bh  tej  ^  ^ 


iixii  kyjto*yh  1}  TX)pjp>ftr+bK>  m  t 

I  kkiisitm  kh  k  tete  ktB  p»> >a.fe^Hi»  h;liMK^ 


llfell  :u?xL&telii*  :lS-»P]pih  jfej  Pbbhbj  phk>  ii-»->h>  (Mb* 
I  HtHhhJ  Itefrll-UrthMPIja  kllfctktetejlk  P^hr,v$j 


llkll  Itelii  Pfifrl?  pua  frthsjhbb  IpVlfe  :itli  ^jjbfc 

|  ^p±  tejitte}  ^  >lb£  ppp?  tei  P^tfe 


II in  |P>.b.Pft]Pj  teiJteXh  :i£  iPlPUjvPhj  t  h^htfe^Uk> 
I  fehj  k  MJJttBJ  lMt  fcSbli  :PJPh  JPIb  >lb$ 

h  a*e 

:iU*  Ih  J&1  ^%ite  Hit! 


Ilkill  M&kte^teakhhfek  ^uJ±i±J.Pi  !P!tP  ^Oojbju 

I  tote  telMftfc  frl^fr  Jtete  teito^  j?b<fe  klb.'bk. 


3HIJ  OIASAPM  3HA  OX  SNPMAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


12.  To  the  seer,  the  understanding  one,  we  have 
uttered  the  word  of  our  adoration,  to  the  Bull,  the 
male;  the  Steadfast  in  Light  has  taken  refuge  in  his 
laud  as  in  a  far-reaching  mass  of  gold. 


Sukta  2 

1 .  The  young  Mother  carries  the  boy  suppressed  in 
the  secret  cavern  and  she  gives  him  not  to  the  father; 
his  force  is  undiminished,  men  see  him  in  front  established 
inwardly  in  the  movement. 

2.  Who  is  this  boy,  O  young  mother,  whom  thou 
carriest  in  thyself  when  thou  art  compressed  into  form, 
but  when  thou  art  vast  thou  hast  given  him  birth? 
Through  many  years  grew  the  child  in  the  womb,  I  saw 
him  born  when  the  mother  brought  him  forth. 

3.  I  saw  him  in  a  distant  field,  one  goldcn-tusked  and 
pure-bright  of  hue  shaping  his  weapons:  to  him  I  am 
giving  immortality  in  my  several  parts  and  what  shall  they 
do  to  me  who  possess  not  Indra  and  have  not  the  word? 

4.  In  that  field  I  saw  ranging  apart  what  seemed  a 
happy  herd  in  its  many  forms  of  beauty;  none  could 
seize  on  them,  lor  he  was  born,  even  those  of  them  who 
were  grey  with  age  became  young  again. 

5.  Who  were  they  that  divorced  my  strength  from  the 
herds  of  light?  Against  them  there  was  no  protector 
nor  any  fighter  in  this  war.  Let  those  who  seized  them 
release  them  back  to  me,  he  has  become  aware  and  is 
driving  back  to  me  my  herds  of  vision. 


al9 


253 


nail  ikb  h>\P^  m  bps 

I  pi$PH>  Ihi2i  k  fei  psfe}  bmfejS  1pm  b  bb 


lio^H  :y^te  psinyh  ^>.fe  k  mitt  mpsk  is  mblp  £h 

I  £  lbP*b  IbblhtP^JPtb^fa  jmPIP->  b£ 


It'bll  blfcjbj  *ii&l  :ix£  ^ySlSJ  =1^1  :llphp^llS 

I  IP^Jh  Ptn£  Pjibfcbjbj^PjlPm  mil  mipjf  bj 


||?ll  kiuitt  2alijkle  pm£lb(j  Ibi  %  ble  i2bj  J£±£ 

|  b-lbP-  IhPfe  lUlb^  ^  U  :hPh  ^  hiE  IPIKh|Jn^ 


I l€\l I  rabbj  £  j&  b^tbjb-tjp^  kililh  bpttii  bj  Prfrh-Ubb 

I  :b  1}  2ahjl£ie  p^HNhb  kll4$ft  bbpp  bSs^^kla 


II^II  S>bH  imrcupj  ^iP^jPj  fc-»p-p  a  blkbalBte 
I  bb^pbb  (bPIX-tlPIPfr  PjPP  blbXi.  mb 

3HIJ  OHS  AIM  3HX  OX  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


6.  The  hostile  powers  have  hidden  within  in  mortals 
the  king  of  those  who  dwell  in  creatures  in  whom  all 
creatures  dwell;  let  the  wisdom- words  of  Atri  release 
him,  let  the  binders  themselves  become  the  bound. 

7.  Shunahsepa  too  was  bound  to  the  thousandfold 
post  of  sacrifice,  him  didst  thou  release  and  he  attained 
to  calm1;  so  do  thou  take  thy  seat  here  in  us,  O  con¬ 
scious  knower,  O  priest  of  the  call,  and  loose  from  us 
the  cords  of  our  bondage. 

8.  Mayst  thou  not  grow  wroth  and  depart  from  me: 
he  who  guards  the  law  of  working  of  the  gods  declared 
it  to  me;  Indra  knew  and  sought  after  and  saw  thee, 
and  taught  by  him,  O  Fire,  I  have  come  to  thee. 

9.  This  Fire  shines  with  the  Vast  Light  and  makes 
all  things  manifest  by  his  greatness.  He  overpowers 
the  workings  of  knowledge  that  are  undivine  and  evil 
in  their  impulse,  he  sharpens  his  horns  to  gore  the  Rak- 
shasa. 

10.  May  the  voices  of  the  Fire  be  sharp  weapons  to 
slay  the  Rakshasa.  In  his  ecstasy  his  angers  break  down, 
all  the  undivine  obstructions  that  besiege  us  cannot  hem 
him  in. 

11.  O  thou  of  the  many  births,  I  the  sage,  the  thinker, 
the  man  of  perfect  works  have  fashioned  for  thee  this 
laud  like  a  chariot.  If,  indeed,  O  god,  thou  shouldst 
take  an  answering  joy  in  it,  by  this  we  could  conquer 
the  waters  that  carry  the  light  of  the  sun-world. 


1  or,  he  achieved  the  work; 


255 


9SS 


11*11  :U'lt)F'  P'frWfelb  bj  ^bbb  W|H>)P<jl 

l  u»ht»  pub>  ibibb  :b£  :ib£  bi  ysIB  lbJa}  bb 


Hill  mu|u  mu  Mt  bjlh  bji  bjlbbj  Hh^lnabJ  ka  bb 
I  UleUJ  Mb-  uujfr  ^  kb  £k  P-»bfrb  jbXJtt  bbs]  bb 


llhll  b^lfi^  ipuhp  yihS  SbfcJJb  b  bbj£  bkj  bdJJ*ble 
I  fejubj  r^T>  kbifeb^  bib  Ibljbfe  kb  bjbb  tbfthN 


Hill  h^h  blklb  (jUhjb*Hb%  ££b}  ^ 

I  :3»ujp  kb  ujbu  ikhj  bi  kb  ynib  bibbi 


i  m 


n't  in  kbb 

Ml  ^uu  ^kabj&Ph  bi£  ^uu  bbaljb  bfejbie 

I  :b^  PjiU'UP  :bb£l£SJbLfeblb  Jbbb 


IH^jk 


33 IJ  0I1SAW  3LIA  Ol  SMJVAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


12.  The  bull  with  the  neck  of  might,  whom  no  enemy 
can  oppose,  grows  and  comes  driving  from  the  foe  the 
riches  of  knowledge.  So  have  the  immortals  spoken  to 
this  Fire  that  he  may  work  out  peace  for  man  when  he 
prepares  the  sacred  seat,  work  out  peace  for  man  when 
he  brings  the  offering. 


Sukta  3 

1.  Thou  art  Varuna,  O  Fire,  when  thou  art  born, 
thou  becomest  Mitra  when  thou  blazest  high;  in  thee 
are  all  the  gods,  O  son  of  force,  thou  art  Indra  for  the 
mortal  giver. 

2.  O  holder  of  the  self-law,  thou  becomest  Aryaman 
when  thou  hearest  the  secret  name  of  the  Virgins;  they 
reveal  thee  with  the  Rays  as  Mitra  firmly  founded  when 
thou  makest  of  one  mind  the  Lord  of  the  house  and 
the  Spouse. 

3.  For  the  glory  of  thee,  O  Rudra,  the  life-powers 
make  bright  thy  birth  into  a  richly  manifold  beauty. 
When  that  highest  step1  of  Vishnu  is  founded  within, 
thou  guardest  by  it  the  secret  name  of  the  Ray-cows. 

4.  By  the  glory  of  thee  who  hast  the  true  seeing,  the 
gods  hold  a  multiple  completeness  and  taste2  immortality; 
men  take  up  their  session  with  Fire,  the  priest  of  the  call, 
aspiring,  making  a  gift  of  the  self-expression  of  the 
human  being. 


1  or,  in  the  supreme  plane  of  the  three 

2  or,  touch 


257 


852 


ll^ll  1£X  biSJb  bbib  itjie  lEPfrjbj  lb£ 

I  ^i£  b&  :k£»  ^ib  Jb£  Plgpj  bjjb  >PhJ  fejLi  ble 


II7II  :Plkh«>jbjfcbPh  ll»lh>  Pb$  P>frh  bib 

I  P^frie  i  pin.  3  £l^  bjk  Ifriblbj 


ne\u  bb2  bjbbb  lb  Jb  biblb^b±jl£kjle  JbbfeJbJ  jib 
I  Pibt>  (pih.k>  ybie  b  Jb 


ll^ll  PjPb  bfob^b  ibli.  bb  liAbahbbj  bhb  bb 
I  ribihbab  ifafcjS  \Pbftb  lbjbi  hlhbb  bihbb 


nVill  PIPk  b|  frbbb  bbb  b  Pjlbb'bJPJH>  lb->b  b-Wfej 
I  rblbbi  bijie  Oh  :b2lib  b  bibyeb  bile  }b£  IbjffbP  b 


abU  OIXSAK  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 

5.  There  is  none  who  precedes  thee  as  priest  of  the 
call,  O  Fire,  none  mightier  for  sacrifice,  there  is  none 
supreme  over  thee  in  the  seer-wisdoms,  O  master  of  the 
self-law,  and  of  whatsoever  man  thou  becomest  the 
guest  conquers  by  sacrifice,  O  godhead,  those  who  are 
mortals. 

6.  May  we  who  seek  the  Riches  win  them  by  the 
offering,  we  guarded  by  thee  and  awakened,  O  Fire, — 
we  in  the  clash  of  the  battle,  in  our  discoveries  of 
knowledge  through  days,  we  by  the  Treasure  overcome 
mortal  men,  O  son  of  force. 

7.  He  who  brings  sin  and  transgression  upon  us,  on  him 
who  gives  expression  to  evil,  on  himself  may  there  be 
put  that  evil;  O  thou  who  art  conscious,  slay  this  hostile 
assault,  O  Fire,  even  him  who  oppresses  us  with  the 
duality.1 

8.  Thee  in  the  dawning  of  this  night,  O  godhead,  the 
ancients  made  their  messenger  and  gave  sacrifice  with 
their  oblations;  for  thou  art  the  godhead  kindled  by 
mortals  who  have  the  light2  and  thou  travellest  to  the 
House  of  the  Treasures. 

9.  Rescue  thy  father,  in  thy  knowledge  keep  him  safe, 
thy  father  who  becomes  thy  son  and  bears  thee,  O  son 
of  force.  O  conscious  knower,  when  wilt  thou  look  upon 
us?  When  with  thy  Truth-Consciousness  wilt  thou  set 
us  to  our  journey? 


1  The  division,  or  the  twofoldness  of  the  nature  divided  between  good 
and  evil. 

2  or,  the  riches 


259 


096 


llfcll  lllJJMfe  £££  H  %3i3ji  J±J 

i  hkyh^hpfi  *pih  fcik  un^ik  pjhcfcj  nty 


II bn  ajims  k^tuty  b  yanjji  :imhkx£ 

I  %ile  yytl£  mihyfcy  y±  my  :>iro.p>jy>iMh=.£ 


11*11  hlhjh^lPfch  i±l!:a  kjSIhhP'  iP^frifc  klk  mm 

I  Wl>.  S^fe?.le  £±h  is  kJMfefete  i^hSte  Khim 

a  t>i& 


lib*  II  rn>  :rnhlli  jmil  k  Ik  hp^i»pj>p>jnhi^ip 
i  fejrnie  yiiiijp  ik  mm  Pt&nsjmimhm 


II nil  kkkte  IPfrJP  IP»PI£smiki£  Ifehi]  kteiJfi  mm 
I  yh  ymijS  mmmmj  23feJJ2  Xmyii  illShJm 


llojn  mmkte  mi&fe  m£i±  t?mi  itejife 

i  sjjj  urn  my  ajitei  tmtmm  itm  yk 


3>IIJ  DIASAW  3HA  OX  SNJVAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


10.  The  father  adores  and  establishes  the  mighty  name 
because  thou,  O  shining  one,  bringest  him  to  accept  and 
take  pleasure  in  it;  once  and  again,  the  Fire  increases  and 
desiring  the  bliss  of  the  godhead  he  conquers  it  by  force. 

11.  O  youthful  god,  thou,  indeed,  carriest  safe  thy 
adorer  beyond  all  stumblings,  O  Fire;  for  the  hostile 
beings  are  seen,  the  thieves,  even  they  who  know  not 
the  light  of  intuitive  knowledge  and  turn  to  crookedness. 

12.  These  journeys  have  turned  towards  thee,  that 
evil  in  us  has  been  declared  to  the  Shining  One,  O  this 
Fire  as  he  grows  will  not  deliver  us  to  the  assailant  and 
the  hurter. 


SUKTA  4 

1.  O  Fire,  O  king,  towards  thee  the  Wealth-master  of 
the  riches  I  turn  and  delight  in  thee  in  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice;  replenishing  thee  may  we  conquer  the  plenitude, 
may  we  overcome  the  battle-hosts  of  mortals. 

2.  The  ageless  Fire  that  carries  the  offering  is  the  father 
of  us,  he  in  us  is  pervasive  in  his  being,  extended  in  light, 
perfect  in  vision.  Accomplished  in  the  works  of  the  master 
of  the  house  blaze  out  thy  forces,  form  and  turn  towards 
us  thy  inspirations. 

3.  The  seer,  the  master  of  men,  lord  of  the  human 
peoples,  Fire,  pure  and  purifying  with  its  back  of  light  set 
within  you  as  the  omniscient  priest  of  the  call;  he  shall 
win  our  desirable  things  in  the  godheads. 


261 


Mo  in  bjLdtousjs  Sikiie  ysfc  ismis 

I  kJJJEi^  Jj2^i  fciilSUdihliiti  lJalJ^lfe  ill  lliifc 


1 1 'ill  klkPP  iPbjfrvM?  IBtH&feJojJg  kde 

I  fcjh  kjikljl  iklk  k  k±kj  :i%km  llkl  Jk  kjlb^b] 


M?M  £jlh  ktelkisyk  ilakiS  kite  :k££  kk 
I  Pb»£  bAbhbj  |bfc  :P^P  b->bP  >b?IO  klitifeihiie 


IISMI  PJlInbjS  PJIbtbj  ^lb-»PJP  >lbbtbj  b]>  ^>0 

I  b.|JtSP  <bblh  :bs~£  bb  kbb)b.t.b  P>lQ  £  bb 


ll^ll  blM->to  Mk  KPP  Sjlh  faiK  ^  PI b^  bfcm&P  Pb  tajhhj 
|  yP->Plbn£  :ht>  »>hPIP-  JS  Lil  ktek 


l|V)H  kjlkklk  mt  IklPbklt  IbpSbj  (P'bHJK>  tile  Ibtbj 
I  idly  %lk  hkkfc  4k  hi  ln(ji|yyig  Ihhl  i&h 


llxll  i&Jk  klfc>bj£  tiki  1  lie  fr^Pii*  b.kjp  :k  b->hb- 

I  k±k&  :kjhftj>  (PIPPb  IblU-P  IbCbS  P(lb->btr. 


3>II3  OIXSAW  3IIX  OX  SiVIAIAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


4.  Of  one  mind  with  the  goddess  of  revelation  take 
pleasure  in  us,  O  Fire,  labouring  with  the  rays  of  the 
sun;  accept  with  pleasure  our  fuel,  O  knowerof  all  things 
born,  and  bring  the  gods  to  us  to  partake  of  our  sacrifice. 

5.  A  cherished  guest  domiciled  in  our  gated  house  come 
to  this  sacrifice  of  ours  as  the  knower;  O  Fire,  slaying  all 
who  assail  us  bring  to  us  the  enjoyments  of  those  who 
make  themselves  the  enemy. 

6.  Drive  away  from  us  the  Destroyer  with  thy  stroke 
making  free  space  for  thy  own  body;  when  thou  earnest 
the  gods  over  safe,  O  son  of  force,  us,  O  Fire,  strongest 
godhead,  guard  in  the  plenitude. 

7.  O  Fire,  may  we  worship  thee  with  our  words,  thee 
with  our  offerings,  O  purifier,  O  happy  light;  into  us  bring 
the  treasure  in  which  are  all  desirable  things,  in  us 
establish  substance  of  every  kind  of  riches. 

8.  Accept  our  pilgrim-sacrifice,  O  Fire,  accept,  O  son 
of  force,  O  holder  of  the  triple  world  of  thy  session,  our 
offering.  May  we  be  doers  of  good  deeds  before  the 
godheads,  protect  us  with  a  triple  armour  of  peace. 

9.  O  knower  of  all  things  bom,  carry  us  through  all 
difficult  passages,  through  all  calamities  as  a  ship  over  the 
ocean.  O  Fire,  voiced  by  us  with  our  obeisance  even  as 
did  Atri,  awake  and  be  the  guardian  of  our  bodies. 

10.  I  think  of  thee  with  a  heart  that  is  thy  bard  and 
mortal  I  call  to  thee  immortal;  O  knower  of  all  things 
born,  establish  the  glory  in  us,  by  the  children  of  my 
works,  O  Fire,  may  I  win  immortality. 


263 


IICMI  kmi  lh£h  lh  h£  I  link  UP2JlJ4hih  fcitufe 


)  |  r,  1 1  ^h|  ^UIhh»lhl  ^  |  I>tj)h  Jtlih3t  ^i2 


llVjii  uu^ioh  £it  UK  I  fchi£  h  UnMlsS  fealilSs  £J 


Uxll  »mi>  iilk  :t  IMt  l  Phhfe  ^feiL-tSUfeifeJS  fej  1M'->1ji^£ 


lUll  j>>  jaS  I  kbiy  £hJPhj  ^ 


Hill  :b^teit  I  :to.]£h.£i2  hyiihS  :hl£lih 

U ^ M  ^te^uiu'  >?p>k>  i  kh  hfej^ia  ftlff'HJhS 

V,  &£t 


iiUii  hijJBi  *hih  fcjl  PitHji  h±feHh  lntj£  h  hhSJie 
I  :feic4  £  £%hil£  ki  hill 


ay u  oixsapm  anx  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  FIVE 


1 1 .  The  doer  of  great  deeds  for  whom  thou  shalt  make 
that  happy  other  world,  O  knower  of  all  things  born, 
reaches  in  peace  a  wealth  in  which  are  the  Horses  of 
swiftness,  the  Ray-Cows,  the  Son,  the  Heroes. 


Sukta  5 

1.  On  the  high-kindled  flame  pour  as  offering  a 
poignant  clarity,  to  Fire,  the  knower  of  all  things  born. 

2.  The  spokesman  of  the  godhead,  the  inviolable  hastens 
the  sacrifice  on  its  way,  for  this  is  the  seer  who  comes 
with  the  wine  of  sweetness  in  his  hands. 

3.  O  Fire,  we  have  sought  thee  with  our  adoration, 
bring  hither  Indra  the  rich  in  light,  the  beloved  with  his 
happy  chariots  to  protect  us. 

4.  Spread  wide,  O  seat,  soft  as  wool  the  songs  of 
illuminations  sound  high;  O  bright  one,  be  with  us  for  the 
conquest. 

5.  Swing  wide,  O  divine  doors;  be  easy  of  appioach 
that  you  may  be  our  guard :  lead  further  further  and  fill 
full  our  sacrifice. 

6.  Dawn  and  night  we  seek  with  desire  the  two  mighty 
Mothers  of  the  Truth  with  their  fair  front  to  us  who 
increase  our  being’s  space. 

7.  O  worshipped  twain,  O  divine  priests  of  man’s  call, 
arrive  on  the  path  of  the  wind  to  this  our  sacrifice. 


265 


992 


Mill  IK  lie  b.*k^k£  hi  bl&  :mpik&  H  :bPh>  |P^bkP 
I  :bkte  kijblkb  K  KitfijS  Ibkijie  IK 

Hill  IK  lie  bAkJki  b£  kteJLfe  IPi^uj  p-Klbifciio  P*bhP^*> 
I  :kkb  k^b  b  P4>fob  y2  kiK  k  p>|^ 

Hi  ill  :feji  l£ll»  I  :b£kk  blS^lb->  hllr,4b  frkH&bK 

Mo  in  hklb  PjlteS  kk  I  kJIKJLk  llib  iPlb^  gtKkfe  hih  Kb 
Mill  K2K  k  kbMb  I  lkkl  k£  hlh  :Rbj  %b  l$>j?qb^bKj 

ll?H  :b&Jbkky±  ijb  I  ikklbk^  JJ&tj  ikb  ^Pb-»P  Ml 


3314  OII.SAPM  3HX  Ol  S.NiWAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


8.  May  Ila,  Saraswati,  and  Mahi,1  the  three  goddesses 
who  create  the  bliss  sit  on  the  sacred  seat,  they  who 
never  err. 

9.  O  maker  of  forms,  hither  benignant  arrive  all- 
pervading  in  thy  fostering  to  us  and  in  thyself;  in  sacrifice 
on  sacrifice  us  upward  guard. 

10.  O  Tree,2  there  where  thou  knowest  the  secret  names 
of  the  gods  make  rich  our  offerings. 

1 1.  Swaha  to  the  Fire  and  to  Varuna,  Swaha  to  Indra 
and  the  Life-powers,  Swaha  to  the  gods  be  our  offering. 


Sukta  6 

1 .  I  meditate  on  the  Fire  who  is  the  dweller  in  things,3 
to  whom  the  milch-cows  go  as  to  their  home,  to  their 
home  the  swift  war-horses,  to  their  home  the  eternal  steeds 
of  swiftness.4  Bring  to  those  who  laud  thee  the  force  of 
thy  impulse. 

2.  This  is  the  Fire  who  is  the  dweller  in  things  voiced 
by  me,  in  whom  meet  the  milch  cows,  and  in  him  the 
swift  galloping  war-horses  and  in  him  the  illuminates 
who  have  come  to  the  perfect  birth.  Bring  to  those  who 
laud  thee  the  force  of  thy  impulse. 


1  Ila,  goddess  of  revelation;  Sarasvvati,  goddexss  of  inspiration;  Mahi, 
goddess  of  the  Vast  Truth,  Mahas  or  rtarn  brhat. 

2  or,  O  master  of  delight, 

3  or,  who  is  the  Shining  One, 

4  or,  steeds  of  the  plenitude. 


267 


892 


117*11  lit  lie  IttPIPi  hi  hP^P  t  him  P 

I  :btPlPl  lit  lie  Pile  JP  1PP 


II6MI  lit  lie  P-t^Pi  hhjlPlli  P±lit  mb  iklids  :pjlph  b 
I  :hj£jLfe  Pifelb  Ijh  JbPie  Pile  bl  PP 


ll^ll  lit  lie  b.-tPlPi  tal>Jhtl^hr.laS  h  P  p 

I  hMfe  PijbaS  bitj  bPijs^bPiie  hi  lb 


UVill  lit  lie  btPlPi  b£  Pbl  btS  phtbj  hip 

I  ilhihpjijt  bit-fe  :bj£  1P3P  Pile  ^  lie 


11*11  lit  lie  JfctPIPl  by=is  PjbP\ft  spjp  mi?^h  ji  ib±  £b 
l  HIPIP^  P±hE  k)P(bl  Pile  J£  lie 


llfen  Pit  lie  bttPJPl  bPjfrlP  Pjlb  jpys  p  PitlPi  bll  iPite 

I  :lr»jnfrbtbj  Pjlbfr  Itbj  PUjlb 


31IIJ  OIXSAPI  3HX  OX  SNIVAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


3.  The  all-seeing  Fire  gives  the  steed  of  the  plenitude 
to  man,  Fire  the  horse  that  comes  swiftly  to  him  for  the 
riches;  when  he  is  pleased  he  journeys  to  the  desirable 
good.  Bring  to  those  who  laud  thee  the  force  of  thy 
impulse. 

4.  O  Fire,  we  kindle  thy  luminous  and  ageless  flame; 
when  the  fuel  of  thee  becomes  more  effective  in  its  labour, 
it  blazes  up  in  heaven.  Bring  to  those  who  laud  thee  the 
force  of  thy  impulse. 

5.  O  Fire,  O  Master  of  the  brilliant  Light,  the  offering 
is  cast  to  thee  with  the  word  of  illumination,  O  bearer  of 
the  offering,  O  master  of  the  creature,  achiever  of  works, 
O  delightful  flame.  Bring  to  those  who  laud  thee  the  force 
of  thy  impulse. 

6.  In  thy  fires  those  greater  fires  of  thee  nurse  every 
desirable  good ;  they,  they  race,  they  run,  they  drive  on  in 
their  impulse  without  a  break.  Bring  to  those  who  laud 
thee  the  force  of  thy  impulse. 

7.  O  Fire,  those  rays  of  thine,  thy  steeds  of  plenitude 
greaten  the  Vast;  they  gallop  with  tramplings  of  their 
hooves  to  the  pens  of  the  ray-cows.  Bring  to  those  who 
laud  thee  the  force  of  thy  impulse. 

8.  Bring  to  us  who  laud  thee,  O  Fire,  new  impelling 
forces  that  lead  to  happy  worlds;  may  we  be  of  those 
who  with  thee  for  their  messenger  sing  the  hymn  of  illu¬ 
mination  in  home  and  home.  Bring  to  those  who  laud 
thee  the  force  of  thy  impulse. 


a20 


269 


11*11  :>frhjlkhj  lki  is  hi  ^fclh 

I  kb  Ik  kfcj  XXb  lb£%  tjiin^  lh±  :k 


llfcll  ikbsjl  IrtPV  kkl£  teb±E  MB 
I  hlkibbih  ih&  if  Bhlbfe  ibijii  b 


nh.u  :kk±t  P^hbfrp  bfe±hjk  kfe£Jb±|le 
I  bfrhb  JXb  JMi  IP  HP  bib  kbj  nhk 


Hill  kbiib  tab  Ipblbipfe]  I?l9lhjb 
l  hb>iu  b|P4  hhjb^b-tb  :h  &  :hum 

s\  im 


II  °  i  II  Ik  lie  teJtpbi  bhjb^bilfebj  bbtpfeS  Jiibbi 


ll'bll  Xk  JLi£  ittiiibi  kl  Ph4PM9  .tbh£  kk  b  Ikk 

I  bjkiie  ku&yss  jbi  ibhib  frpxfii  kk 


HilLI  DIXSAW  3HX  ox  SKIVAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


9.  O  delightful  Flame,  thou  turnest  both  the  ladles  of 
the  streaming  clarity  towards  thy  mouth;  then  mayst 
thou  carry  us  high  beyond  in  the  utterances,  O  Master 
of  might.  Bring  to  those  who  laud  thee  the  force  of  thy 
impulse. 

10.  Thus  have  they  driven  and  controlled  the  Fire 
without  a  break  by  their  words  and  their  sacrifices; 
may  he  found  in  us  the  perfect  hero-might  and  the  perfect 
power  of  the  Horse.  Bring  to  those  who  laud  thee  the 
force  of  thy  impulse. 


Sukta  7 

1.  O  comrades,  in  you  an  integral  force  and  complete 
laud  to  Fire  the  most  powerful  among  the  peoples,  to 
the  mighty  child  of  energy. 

2.  Whom  wheresoever  they  come  into  contact  with, 
him  men  who  have  the  power  rapturously  set  alight  in 
this  house  of  man  and  all  beings  born  strive  to  bring  to 
birth. 

3.  Whenso  we  win  completely  the  impulsions  of  force, 
completely  the  offerings  human  beings  must  give,  then 
he  gathers  to  himself  the  Ray  of  the  light  and  the  might 
and  the  Truth. 

4.  Yea,  he  creates  the  light  of  intuition  even  for  one 
who  is  far  off  in  the  night,  the  purifying  and  imperishable 
Fire  ravages  the  trees  of  the  forest. 


271 


ZLZ 


Ho l\\  ukir^mp  :bj<;iPJnhB>  kiidie 


H'bll  :lb  hjrt-)h  life]  lie  fete  HitfaaB  Jail 

i  feijHis  kis^SaihjB  lie 


ll?U  kbit  l*MSfr  Unit,  imn  fekikk 
I  b|Pbjbi  IS  Pbkjte  lt+>b  Jja  :fejTt 


IIGMI  :hjbjP?.)kbj>kfet>bjfi; 

l  :Ikh  >^pi»  t  iph>  PPajib^b  lha  if 


n^-n  feMitj  P|IPPihtbfehj  PMbi  £ 

I  ijiilti  h>bbbj  kbiy  £L±h£  £ 


llV)ll  :hk  fe?ah  IJttit  hiizhi  Bhjitie 
I  PjMl*  Mtjh  £%1  Ktife  bib  Hi  feie 


JI'HIJ  OIXSAJM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


5.  When  in  his  service  men  cast  down  their  sweat  on 
the  paths,  they  ascend  to  a  self-born  ground  as  if  to  wide 
levels. 

6.  Him  mortal  man  must  come  to  know  as  one  who 
holds  the  multitude  of  his  desires  so  that  he  may  establish 
in  him  all;  he  moves  towards  the  sweet  taste  of  the 
draughts  of  the  wine  and  to  the  building  of  the  house 
for  man. 

7.  Pure  and  bright,  verily,  is  he  and  he  tears  our 
desert  dwelling  place,1  like  a  beast  who  tears,  a  Beast 
with  golden  beard  and  tusks  of  bright  purity,  he  is  like  a 
smith  whose  force  is  unafflicted  by  the  heat  of  the  Fire. 

8.  Yes,  he  is  pure  and  bright  and  he  is  as  one  whose 
axe  is  like  an  eater  and  ever  enters  deeper;  with  a  happy 
delivery  his  mother  bore  him,  for  he  is  an  achiever  of  the 
work  and  wins  enjoyment  of  the  bliss. 

9.  O  Fire,  to  whom  is  poured  the  running  stream  of 
the  offering  of  light  the  man  who  is  a  happy  ground  for 
establishing  thee, — in  such  mortals  found  the  light,  and 
the  inspiration  and  the  knowledge. 

10.  Even  so,  irresistible  born,  I  receive  the  force  of 
mind,  the  cow  of  vision  given  by  thee.  O  Fire,  then  may 
Atri  overcome  the  destroyers  who  satisfy  thee  not,  may 
he  overcome  forces  and  men. 


1  or,  the  solid  ground  on  which  wc  dwell, 


273 


1 1 V,  1 1  hfaH*  h^InltafcPJPj  ^  lii  :hj^j  Iftftf.'frK 

I  P?q»K  ibJbiJs  lyifei  ims  iibjjsbj  lixMi  kittfe^ 


II;-. II  :kjPJ^-£  IPlth  UkSJK:  IkJLhkjii  Bihh  ik  B 

I  kkjk  hlkitk  likinlthjlk  bb  lbbibj  Pjinb  KHI1=p 


11^11  kb&Jbb  £bS  ftlttbabjS  MtS  iBB  lilt 

I  hhklhk^  PjbjbJ  bbjlbjl  yibj  ff”|>.(hkUi  krhlN 


llhll  hhPjXto  kfrbk  inp±ii6  pfokb  h-sn>£  kb^b 
I  Abjb  kj  Pjh $?>  :iibj  b=£  bjkjie  P>mfcp 


ll&ll  hhn>b  k|hMt  ppkfr  kMbbsbj  kkX2 
I  BBS.  KIHK  kiis  ^hjikk  :bblP3b  kiklbk 


? 


a^IId  OIXSAJM  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


SuKTA  8 

1.  O  Fire,  created  by  our  force,  thee  the  Ancient  one, 
the  ancient  seekers  of  Truth,  set  blazing  for  their  guard 
the  master  of  sacrifice  with  his  many  delights  who 
establishes  all,  Fire  who  dwells  in  the  house,  master  of 
the  house,  the  supremely  desirable. 

2.  Thee,  O  Fire,  men  seated  within  as  the  ancient 
guest,  the  master  of  the  house  with  his  tresses  of  light, 
— vast  is  his  intuition,  many  are  his  forms,  he  brings  out 
the  riches,  he  is  a  giver  of  perfect  peace  and  protection 
and  a  destroyer  of  the  foe. 

3.  Thee  the  human  people  pray,  O  Fire,  who  knowest 
the  word  of  invocation,  who  hast  the  just  discernment, 
who  art  strongest  to  found  the  ecstasy, — thee  who  dwell- 
est  in  the  secret  cave,  O  happy  Flame,  and  hast  the  vision 
of  all  things,  the  perfect  sacrificer  with  the  multitude  of 
thy  voices  and  the  glory  and  beauty  of  thy  light. 

4.  Thee,  O  Fire,  who  upholdest  all  things  in  every  way 
we  voicing  thee  with  our  words  have  approached  with 
obeisance;  so  do  thou  accept  us,  O  Angiras,  a  godhead 
kindled  by  the  glory  of  a  mortal  and  by  his  high 
illuminings. 

5.  O  Fire,  thou  takest  many  forms  for  man  and  man 
and  thou  foundest  for  him  his  growth  as  of  old,  O  thou 
lauded  by  many  voices;  many  are  the  things  on  which 
thou  feedest  and  thou  illuminest  them  all  with  thy  force, 
and  none  can  do  violence  to  the  fury  of  thy  blaze  when 
thou  blazest  up  in  thy  might. 


275 


Ilxll  BEt  kkh  kiSikk  HJikik  m 

|  Hlln^lP  k  *k£  kxy+p  Hi  k£ 


Itfell  Hikiki  kkkllskj  ilnjkkik  l^kk 
I  yoi!2akJk  kk  kftk  kkl  h  Hi  k£ 


Mill  :kkikJr«  :HiMk  H  k  P'J»*mPft  H 
I  :kijjkkfek  kikki  :kkilk  IPjpPfJiS 


lU  II  ifekklkSk  lka£  H  PE^PII*  Uk  k±H 
|  ^o|  H^kH  kk  IP^hgEjS  kiklki 


’b  !fe& 


HSakJ  kj  iktejlh  HJlkik  Hjs^m^HjysH^e  kikklk  k 
I  ^bjy±H  lhhjhfi  :kklki&  :kk  kike  kkJK  p>pi^ 


ll^ll  kjkikklfe  ikjkfek  JHk  p§ihP])hUh  phr*>»p> 
I  kk^ikha^  kl  ikk  KOibjb  kitei^k  kiklki 


3HM  OIXSAH  3HX  OX  SNIVAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


6.  Thee,  O  youthful  Fire,  in  thy  high  kindling  the 
gods  have  made  a  messenger  and  a  carrier  of  the  offer¬ 
ings;  thee  of  whom  light  is  the  native  seat  and  wide  are 
the  spaces  through  which  thou  movest,  they  have  set 
when  thou  hast  received  the  offerings  as  a  keen  burning 
eye  that  urges  the  thought. 

7.  Thee,  O  Fire,  fed  with  offerings  of  light  from  the 
higher  heaven1  the  seekers  of  bliss  kindled  with  an  entire 
kindling,  so  now  growing  on  the  herbs  to  thy  full  might 
thou  spreadest  over  wide  earth-spaces. 

Sukta  9 

1.  Thee,  O  Fire,  men  bringing  offerings  pray,  mortals 
the  godhead;  I  meditate  on  thee  as  the  knower  of  all 
things  born  and  as  such  thou  carriest  our  offerings 
without  a  break. 

2.  Fire  is  the  priest  of  the  call  in  the  house  of  the  giver 
who  has  plucked  the  grass  for  the  seat  of  sacrifice  and  in 
him  our  sacrifices  meet  and  our  plenitudes  of  inspired 
knowledge. 

3.  Verily,  the  two  tinders  have  brought  to  birth  as  if 
new-born  infant  Fire  who  does  aright  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice,  to  be  the  upholder  of  the  human  beings. 

4.  Verily,  thou  art  hard  to  seize  like  a  son  of  crooked¬ 
nesses;  many  are  the  trees  of  the  forest  thou  consumest, 
O  Fire,  like  a  beast  in  his  pasture. 


1  or,  from  of  old;  or,  the  ancient  seekers  of  bliss 


277 


8  LZ 


Uxll  ipi*>  PJM}MMlMfe£  kkk  lMM  ilk  JiaMajlk  :ttj^al£ 

I  :amteS^iltaIk  :llij  ^  £i£  Mile  M 


II £ M  ritPlh'imM  urn  tftlfe  is  M 

i  m m  m  £aj£  mm  mb  Mile  jm  mi 


llkll  :MMJM  M  JMiy  llullM  Ml&IMhBile 
I  ip£m  MliSM  1M1M  Mltkle  Mile  \k  Ml 


ulu  kb±h  mimxm  aiji  imioux  mu  u±  is 

I  jMJMjkMiMiMMifi  lit  iMV^Mjiie  mie 


o\ 


II6MI  MM  JM  6lh  MJMM  MM1M  M1M1M  MMlt  klM^h  M  MMM1S  M 
I  lit  lie  Ml$M  MJ1  Ilk  ytle  Mile  *M  M 


11^11  M1M1M1M  MlbS  IMljS  M  immims 

I  :HJP-»jlfeK  M  h^kMjhjPjf  PtbilfeP 


llVjll  mm  jlMl  M3  MJMM  MM1M3  hMsMJ  1MMJ  ^Mlj>M 

I  :MMjJi  MzjMM  SfelaM  :MM3M1M  Ml  Mle 


3313  OIXSAXM  3HX  OX  SKTWAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


5.  Now,  verily,  his  rays  with  their  smoke  meet  perfectly 
together  when  Trita,  the  triple  one,  blows  upon  him  in 
heaven  like  a  smelter,  it  is  as  if  in  the  smelter  that  he 
whets  his  flame. 

6.  I  by  thy  guardings,  O  Fire,  and  by  thy  utterances 
as  the  friend — like  men  beset  by  hostile  powers  so  may  we 
pass  beyond  the  stumbling-places  of  mortals. 

7.  O  forceful  Fire,  bring  to  us,  to  men,  the  treasure; 
may  he  cast  his  shafts,  may  he  foster  us,  may  he  be 
with  us  for  the  conquest  of  the  plenitude.  Be  with  us 
in  our  battles  that  we  may  grow. 


Sukta  10 

1.  O  Fire,  bring  to  us  a  light  full  of  energy,  O 
unseizable  Ray;  for  us  by  thy  opulence  pervading  on 
every  side  cut  out  in  our  front  a  path  to  the  plenitude. 

2.  O  Fire,  O  Wonderful,  come  to  us  with  thy  will  and 
the  growth  of  the  judgment;  in  thee  the  sacrificial  Friend, 
achiever  of  the  work  can  climb  to  almightiness. 

3.  Increase  for  us,  O  Fire,  the  acquisition  and  the 
growth  of  these  who  are  men  that  are  illuminates  and  by 
their  laudings  of  thee  have  attained  to  the  plenitudes  of 
the  riches, — 

4.  who,  O  delightful  Fire,  have  achieved  the  power  of 
the  horse  and  make  beautiful  their  words  of  thee,  strong 
men  with  their  strength  whose  is  the  Vast  that  is  greater 
even  than  heaven,  for  in  them  that  glory  by  itself  awakes. 


279 


082 


nfcii  :bbj  t>j»j  nine  KEhbbib*  bi*ii 

I  ;ub»bbj  (yqpj»»t>j«fe  :2±hbjb  :.(bli±  liblb  J2abbb 


Hill  :£>b£  bibix-b  ib<£  bjblb  bjljb  b  fe*b  :b^  i£^ 
I  b  bibbbijlb  P;]hp£^l£  bb£  b%  b*bb 


lUll  :bjb  :b*l*Xb  PJ»Ht  bj  khk  UiMbJiJ  )b%b  l&lPKPb 
I  ^b=.U  hlUbjfc  tUjVbjblH'  ??bp£b  ihlb  b*bb 


a  km 


lie\u  bb  <b  Mi  bjbb  b  b  £bb*  :b*b(b4  hji  £blb.*bjbjl 
I  lb  lb  bibb*  :bl*  :>-£jb  bib  <b  bi 


ll^ll  injb£b±lblb  lbibj  lfr*.b  bSbbfeibib 
|  hPI>  fr»P  bib  lb  b 


l|V)H  :bblb  b  lbl  lb  lb*  :b£bj  b  jblbbljh 

I  iMn<ih  bijb  Jbiblbt  Jbfeb  bib  tb  bb 


a’au  OIASAH  3HA  0.1.  SNHAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


5.  These  are  those  flaming  rays  of  thine,  O  Fire,  and 
they  go  blazing  and  violent,  like  lightnings  that  run  over 
all  quarters,  like  the  voice  of  a  chariot  seeking  the 
plenitude. 

6.  Soon,  O  Fire,  may  alike  those  of  us  who  are  opposed 
and  obstructed  attain  to  protection  and  the  giving  of  the 
riches  and  our  illuminates  break  through  all  directions 
and  beyond. 

7.  Thou,  O  Fire,  O  Angiras,  after  and  during  the  laud 
bring  to  us  riches  of  a  far-reaching  force,  O  priest  of  the 
call,  for  those  who  laud  thee  and  for  our  further  laud. 
Be  with  us  in  our  battles  that  we  may  grow. 


Sukta  11 

1.  Fire  the  guardian  of  men  has  been  born,  wakeful 
and  discerning  for  a  new  happy  journey;  luminous  is  his 
front  and  with  his  heaven-touching  vast  he  shines  out 
full  of  light  and  brilliant  in  his  purity  for  the  Bringers. 

2.  Fire  the  supreme  intuition  of  the  sacrifice,  the 
representative  priest,  men  have  kindled  high  in  the 
triple  world  of  his  session;  let  him  come  in  one  chariot 
with  Indra  and  the  gods  and  take  his  seat  on  the  sacred 
grass,  the  priest  of  the  call,  strong  in  will  to  sacrifice. 

3.  Unoppressed  thou  art  born  brilliant-pure  from  the 
mothers  twain,  a  rapturous  priest  of  the  call  thou  hast 
risen  up  from  the  sun;  they  have  increased  thee  with 
the  offering  of  light,  O  Fire,  fed  with  the  oblation  and 
thy  smoke  has  become  a  ray  of  intuition  lodged  in  heaven. 


281 


I 


Z2Z 


llfcll  :bli  b^h  lib  IbP'te  ih£3fe  b£  i±  ii| 

I  :b£b  Jblt  P^fehPTte  biiE  Jb  Lb!fe 


nhll  :if^fc  h^ta^h-tihP  b3fe  bb2  b  I  bib  bib  lib 
I  :|b£  bijb  bis  mb  bibb2l>fejbybjb3b  bbfejbj  b3b 


iiiii  W|p\pk  bbtbb  ^b  ibj  b£fi  Mile  bb  b  bb 
I  bib  bab  t^Pifc  bibbjfa  bib  bbbb 


U  m 


ll^ll  :v£jbkfop£p  :Iibllb  bib  jib  :bl bbab  iibib  b 
I  PbPb  I f> I  hk,j(Bol^bl b^PP^J  lM±  JbbMlJiS  bbtlbi 


llV,ll  b:  b±|bbb  mh&  P-jlnh  I^lbibbibbJbibJ  :ibj  lib 
I  bl  1£  fobfrS  ih^Pb  b.-tfeibb  bbbbb  bthib.*! 


II  XU  hEfefeJife  l^ifP  i  pi  if  b  bi^Jblibbs^bbiE  jbfebtjK: 
I  liffi  biib  bj  ibb  bt^sibblb  £b  bbbb  ^bbipe 


3313  0I1SAIAI  3  Hi  OX  SHHAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


4.  May  the  Fire  come  to  our  sacrifice  with  power  to 
accomplish,  men  carry  the  Fire  severally  in  house  and 
house;  the  Fire  has  become  the  messenger  and  carrier  of 
our  offering;  when  men  accept  the  Fire  it  is  the  seer- will 
that  they  accept. 

5.  For  thee,  O  Fire,  this  word  most  full  of  the  honey¬ 
sweetness,  for  thee  this  Thinking,  let  it  be  a  happiness  to 
thy  heart;  thee  our  words  fill  with  force  as  the  great 
rivers  fill  the  sea  and  make  thee  grow. 

6.  Thee,  O  Fire,  the  Angiras  sought  and  found  hidden 
in  the  secrecy  lodging  in  tree  and  tree;  by  our  pressure 
on  thee  thou  art  born  a  mighty  force,  the  Son  of  force 
they  call  thee,  O  Angiras! 


Sukta  12 

1 .  To  Fire,  the  vast  sacrificial  flame,  to  the  Bull  of  the 
Truth,  to  the  mighty  lord  I  bring  my  thought  as  if  the 
offering  of  light  in  the  sacrifice,  purified  in  the  mouth  I 
bring  the  word  turned  to  meet  him  for  the  master  of  the 
herds. 

2.  O  thou  conscious  of  the  Truth,  of  the  Truth  alone 
be  conscious,  cut  out  in  succession  many  streams  of  the 
Truth;  I  know  not  how  to  travel  by  force  or  by  division 
to  the  Truth  of  the  shining  lord. 

3.  By  what  thought  of  ours  seeking  the  Truth  by  the 
Truth  shalt  thou  become  for  us,  O  Fire,  a  new  discoverer 
of  the  word?  The  god  who  is  guardian  of  the  order  and 
laws  of  the  Truth  knows  me  but  I  know  him  not,  the 
master  of  the  conquering  riches. 


283 


m 


tl*l>  u;fc»P  bj  bb  lbbl  I  :bn^b  ib^  l&k  bjle  lbbb  bihlb 

II ^ II  vnuu>  b»b  bl&b  b  I  lbabblh  y*  lbj£  lib}  Jb  PhP'PtJK 

« 

Hill  :b>>>inPjS  bib£  I  :l£h±bjhj  JSbbibJ  i^blbb  bjbi  :bbe 


Hill  bb£  P'P-k>  bile  I  ^hyatjli  :P-P^hlb£  lblib±feie 


\l  mt 


ll^ll  :bJi  >^h§P  frHr^ftbK  l^blb  libb  :bte  bib 
I  :iaab  fr^hfriPih  b  b3b  jlHPh  lbhfa  bile  ^ib 


I|V>||  rbifeb  bjlbbjb  PfrP}PK)|feb  (j^btei  bbbie 
I  bbbie  lb%te  |P-*P  :blbiy  bile  llnbfej 


HxH  :114b  b±jb  :bbb  Ibblle  a>  bijlh  bibble  bibbjlb  % 
I  :p thlk  P^hPjP  :bblh  ^  :blbbib  %hij  bile  *1  % 


aaij  oixsaw  a  hi  oj.  snwah 


MANDALA  FIVE 


4.  O  Fire,  who  are  these  that  are  binders  of  the 
Adversary,  who  are  the  guardians,  the  luminous  ones 
that  shall  possess  and  conquer?  who  keep  the  foundation 
of  the  Falsehood,  O  Fire?  who  are  the  guardians  of  the 
untrue  Word? 

5.  These  were  thy  comrades,  O  Fire,  who  have  turned 
away  from  thee,  they  were  benignant  and  have  become 
malign;  they  have  done  violence  to  themselves  by  their 
words  speaking  crooked  things  to  the  seeker  after  straight¬ 
ness. 

6.  But  he,  O  Fire,  who  desires  with  obeisance  the 
sacrifice,  guards  the  Truth  of  the  luminous  lord;  let  there 
come  to  him  his  wide  and  perfect  habitation,  the  last 
state  of  man  as  he  advances  on  his  journey. 


Sukta  13 

1.  Singing  the  word  of  illumination  we  call  to  thee, 
singing  the  word  of  illumination  we  kindle,  singing  the 
word  of  illumination,  O  Fire,  that  thou  mayst  be  our 
guard. 


2.  Seekers  of  the  riches  we  meditate  today  the  all- 
achieving  laud  of  the  divine,  heaven-touching  Fire. 

3.  May  Fire  accept  our  words,  he  who  is  the  priest  of 
the  call  in  men;  may  he  sacrifice  to  the  divine  kind. 

4.  Great  is  thy  wideness,  O  Fire,  our  priest  of  the  call, 
beloved  and  supremely  desirable;  by  thee  men  carry  out 
the  sacrifice. 


a21 


285 


9QZ 


ll^ll  I  WlnjhbbtbjhJ^(tU  :bblb  b^bt  b>ltt 


l|V)||  hfrPMnft?  ^  Sfe  I  bbhb  y^hPb.  jsiifc  h*g>(Kbjh> 


llxll  :bi  :hte  lb  iidbjle  I  :itb  itaPj|frjvch->b  bbo  bb.^n>  ^U'U»jte 


llfell  felted  bijie  l  iPbiiUb  ib.T»  p^btis  £ 


llkll  bl£  frblH  Safrjft  I  hMfctte  ^Hh  bj5  ucn|ba^bobP 
Hill  kfeb  Jb  lt&i*  l  kbikte  \bifehjp  t?b[b  b^(P4 

8*  ££B 


i  bjikyh  ^jb^  1=1  i»hjb  tile 


IIV)||  JnhyeS  bili  Jb  b  I  Wb?afc  %}bb  iKbj  bbibuob  u.bibj 


aaia  oixsah  am  ox  snhah 


MANDALA  FIVE 


5.  Thee  high-lauded,  O  Fire,  the  strong  conqueror  of 
the  plenitudes,  the  illumined  wise  increase;  so  do  thou 
give  us  the  gift  of  a  complete  hero-might. 

6.  As  the  rim  of  a  wheel  the  spokes,  so  dost  thou  en¬ 
compass  the  gods;  thou  shalt  arrange  for  us  our  rich 
achievement. 


Sukta  14 

1.  Awake  by  the  laud  the  Fire,  let  the  immortal  be 
kindled  and  let  him  set  our  offerings  in  the  godheads. 

2.  Him  they  pray  in  the  pilgrim-sacrifices,  mortals  the 
divine  and  immortal  who  is  strong  for  sacrifice  in  human 
kind. 

3.  Him,  the  divine  Fire,  the  perpetual  generations 
pray  with  the  ladle  dripping  the  clarity  for  the  carrying 
of  their  offerings. 

4.  Fire  at  his  birth  has  shone  out  slaying  the  destroyers, 
darkness  by  the  light,  he  found  the  Ray-Cows,  the 
Waters,  the  Sun- World. 

5.  Serve  Fire  the  supremely  desirable,  the  seer  with 
his  back  of  Light;  may  he  come,  may  he  hear  my  call. 

6.  The  Fire  they  have  made  to  grow  by  the  light,  the 
all-seeing  by  their  lauds  that  place  rightly  the  thought 
that  seek  for  the  word. 


287 


882 


iiViii  :hihfcj&M>fej  mi  i£h  iMiLm  k  >.h 

I  :bl*  lni>b  b^b  ^UU^b->lh^bb)fc  ^  ±»  |UMb 


llxll  BJUifrJ  ihfrhbj  ijh  Ik  ^ite  JM^Mt 

1  k  ^blb  bb'blf'  ^IbKh  ^ifc  Mi  b^lk 


llsll  :h  ijh  :PkjH?-»  k  ^  P}J?fcfopiP.b.h  (Pfeft  H 
I  b}b=.fi  •>■?&  iitt  JJ2J2  fej  ^b^b^->bb^B> 


Itfcll  :&Mi  fc  itjle  iPi^pi^b  jhbj*  kkh  ktb  *M>J 
I  Ph(h°  J±ih  %LL£  MM2  lMtiUa  lakh  Jilt  i-P>- 


lUtt  :M^s  JMt  ynkb  \£k  }Mi  }Ms£  :i£ie  }tt£ttel3 
I  b}boft  ^Ifcb  ^it  ill}  blta^  bbtfe  ^b^  Is 


\l  ’Mt 


a^M  OIXSAH  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


SUKTA  15 

1.  I  bring  my  word  to  the  creator  and  seer,  him  whom 
we  must  know,  the  glorious,  the  ancient  one;  Fire  the 
Mighty  One  seated  in  the  light,  full  of  bliss,  the  holder  of 
the  Treasure,  the  continent  of  the  Riches. 

2.  By  the  Truth  they  held  the  Truth  that  holds  all,  in 
the  might  of  the  sacrifice,  in  the  supreme  ether,  they  who 
reached  the  gods  seated  in  the  law  that  is  the  upholder  of 
heaven,  reached  by  the  godheads  born  the  unborn. 

3.  They  weave  bodies  that  reject  evil,  they  weave  a 
vast  expansion  hard  to  cross  for  the  ancient  one;  he  new¬ 
born  can  cross  through  the  regions1  though  they  stand 
around  him  as  around  an  angry  lion. 

4.  When  growing  wide  thou  bearest  like  a  mother  birth 
after  birth  for  firm  foundation,  for  vision,  when  thou 
holdest  and  wearest  out  manifestation  after  manifestation, 
taking  many  forms  thou  encompasses t  all  things  with 
thyself. 

5.  May  thy  plenitude  guard  the  last  limit  of  thy  force, 
the  wide  continent  of  the  riches  that  milks  out  its  abun¬ 
dance,  O  godhead :  like  a  thief  thou  holdest  in  the  secrecy 
that  plane,  awakening  him  to  the  consciousness  of  the 
great  riches  thou  hast  rescued  Atri. 


1  or,  breaks  through  his  converging  hunters 


289 


062 


Hi ll  ^  jtiyie 

I  frPhPIfraP  IbPS  KPb  bfaUih  U£ 

N‘  •*  ^  r 


«\&  m 


nViM  tit  <Jd  §ih  tjtjtli  fetlh  tijjbi  :h>ft  Ja  t  tt  t 
I  it  It  Hinlt  l^bhlb  H  ±» 


IUUI  :£tkt  Jbla  ijh  ^p»>(>  tilt  frhJP 
I  tb£h  iiah  bill  lhifi 


tlfell  JQtt  injbqbjE  bh^jb  ibStej 

I  ■•hbj^g'b  hi>P  :U|htb  ^(P* 


llhll  PJbr.b>lb  b  UiblXblibiJMal  tj 
I  alib  fciite  lbjl  jHbfrhjfe  Ij  Us 


Hill  :i£  ibjb  ^jbhhjbyttt  b  tbj  to 
I  bbnhlfcfa  JbSJgblR  %  Jtob  bib 

^  km 


a-au  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MAN D ALA  FIVE 


SUKTA  16 

1 .  Create  by  the  illumining  word  a  wide  expansion  for 
the  Light,  for  the  divine  Fire,  whom  mortals  by  their 
proclaimings  of  him  set  in  their  front  as  Mitra  the  friend. 

2.  He  is  men’s  priest  of  the  call  who  by  his  illumina¬ 
tions  carries  in  his  two  arms  of  the  Understanding  the 
offerings  wholly  in  a  continuous  order;  as  Bhaga,  the 
enjoycr,  he  reaches  our  desirable  good. 

3.  In  the  lauding  of  this  master  of  plenty,  in  his  friend¬ 
ship  as  his  light  grows,  for  all  things  are  in  this  Fire  of  the 
many  voices,  men  have  founded  their  strength  in  him,  the 
Noble  One. 

4.  Now,  indeed,  O  Fire,  these  have  reached  a  plenitude 
of  heroic  strength,  around  him  as  around  one  mighty, 
earth  and  heaven  have  become  an  inspired  knowledge. 

5.  Now,  voiced  by  our  word,  come  to  us  and  bring  to 
us  our  desirable  good;  we  here  and  the  illumined  seers, 
let  us  together  found  our  blissful  state.  And  do  thou  be 
with  us  in  our  battles  that  we  may  grow. 


Sukta  17 

1.  Mortal  man  should  pray  thee,  O  god,  by  the  sacri¬ 
fices  because  thou  hast  the  right  strength  for  his  guard; 
when  well-done  is  the  pilgrim-sacrifice  man  must  pray 
the  Fire  that  he  may  protect  him. 


291 


Z6Z 


llfell  itei  .Ibfc  (?3>jh> 

I  kikith  jfel  my  jafej^hjb^  m  k 


llhll  fcH±te  ^  k&J  IP(P»  0,hMK>  ma  li  kiS 
I  Lh^h  kitei  kifei  ^ifePfeh  hipgj 


n^ii  pjkai.  Im±  ihs^  jkikte  y*  lyiksty 

I  :kjjjjm^m  :i£iy  yusjiS  :ky>PIK 


I|V)II  hfe  JJ±  SiL  fcjk£  hPifci  teyte  Ijih  j??ot+pthP  y*!£ 
I  :ki&  t^pp  miHhiP  £jl  k  !• 


iiaii  Hiiiis  js  fefejjtys^  BikSfej  ifcte 
l  lie  Jtei  £k  y>Pfrty  ii^ite  jms 


Mfell  :hP-iP*E-l«a.$E>  ipp>  Mk  k  um 
i  my  kfekite  h  mkjte  k  mik  kite 


Mill  lktyfck  )Xh  S±h  hPJIItkP-j  Mt  JP 

i  %fe*j±  kifetej  mm  imiskki  Ij  kite 


g^IJ  OIXSAJV  HI-11  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 

2.  By  his  mouth,  in  his  complete  law,  thou  becomest 
greater  in  the  self-glory  and  holdest  in  mind  that  rap¬ 
turous  heaven  manifoldly  brilliant  in  its  light  beyond  the 
thinking  mind. 

3.  This,  indeed,  is  he  who  by  the  ray  of  this  Fire  has 
become  possessed  of  the  force  and  the  word  and  whose 
rays  by  the  seed  of  heaven  blaze  into  a  vast  light. 

4.  By  the  will  of  this  completely  conscious  achiever  of 
works  the  riches  are  there  in  his  car;  so  now  is  the  Fire 
the  one  to  be  called  and  he  is  proclaimed  in  all  the  peoples. 

5.  Now,  indeed,  by  the  mouth  of  the  Fire,  can  the 
luminous  seers  cleave  to  that  desirable  good;  O  son  of 
energy,  protect  us  that  we  may  enter  in,  have  power  for 
the  happy  state.  And  do  thou  be  with  us  in  our  battles 
that  we  may  conquer. 


Sukta  18 

1 .  Let  the  Fire  with  his  multitude  of  delightful  things, 
the  guest  of  man,  receive  the  laud  at  dawn  he  who  is 
immortal  in  mortals  and  takes  joy  in  all  their  offerings. 

2.  The  plenitude  of  his  own  understanding  for  the 
twofold  power  that  carries  the  purified  offering;  he 
holds  uninterruptedly  the  moon-wine  and  he  too  who 
lauds  thee,  holds  it,  O  immortal. 

3.  I  call  him  by  the  word  who  is  the  light  of  long- 
extended  life  for  you  the  lords  of  plenty,  you  whose  chariot 
goes  abroad  without  hurt,  O  giver  of  the  Horse, — 


293 


1 1  All  JJiteSK  :b2£sti2J£l£lte  k  JK& 

I  ifeli  :ll»IU'  hjlfrhh-Qtfe  t  feil  b*j 


llkll  t  ifeah  Ikh  hfe?s& 

I  :&sa£  £±bfe  fehK  |bP^  ^hfcfe*  IK 


llfcll  i£  iSfel  IK  I  iiyih  ln±k  tahjPjciP*frPbj  fej  >j& 


Mill  Safe  kjSlK  itath£  I  P^P-tJKJbbb  K  ^MU>  is  :IH4bh*K> 

\>l  £& 


llV,ll  klink  Mkm*  iklfeit  JfeK  Pfbhft 

I  lijEifeli  li;Lfei>J?jE  Pltlb-ch  a  fc 


llAll  IJh  ibjii  PJjbK.  >  In  b->  lnlP> 

I  to  Xijlh  lb>K.PI>Pjhj|b  fib  ifi  Ikbj 


a^H  OIXSAK  ai-LI.  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


4.  In  whom  is  the  richly  brilliant  light  of  thought 
and  they  guard  the  utterances  in  their  mouths;  spread 
is  the  sacred  seat  and  they  found  the  inspirations  all 
around  it  in  the  Godhead  of  the  sun-world. 

5.  They  who  have  given  me  in  the  moment  of  the 
laud  the  fifty  steeds  of  swiftness  create  for  those  lords  of 
plenty  a  great  and  luminous  inspired  knowledge,  create 
for  those  gods  the  Vast,  with  its  gods,  O  Immortal,  O 
Fire. 


SUKTA  19 

1 .  State  upon  state  is  born,  covering  upon  covering 
has  become  conscious  and  aware,  in  the  lap  of  the  mother 
he  sees. 

2.  Awaking  to  an  entire  knowledge  they  have  called 
and  guard  a  sleepless  strength,  they  have  entered  the 
strong  fortified  city. 

3.  Creatures  born,  men  who  people  the  earth  have 
increased  the  luminosity  of  the  son  of  the  white  mother; 
his  neck  wears  the  golden  necklace,  he  has  the  utterance 
of  the  Vast,  and  with  his  honey- wine  he  is  the  seeker  of 
the  plenitude. 

4.  He  is  as  if  the  delightful  and  desirable  milk  of  the 
mother,  he  is  that  which  is  uncompanioned  abiding  with 
the  two  companions;  he  is  the  blaze  of  the  light,  and  the 
belly  of  the  plenitude,  he  is  the  eternal  invincible  and 
the  all-conqueror. 


295 


962 


11*11  :£dkkk  kito  :l*k  Jklfctkk  J±J to  :kjyi  lki-S  Mk3fe  toi 
I  %kj£k}  kklklk  bki£  k  Ifek  itol 


II fell  fe*lb£  ^b4t?KI>lj  to£  hbb 

i  kfcjsm  Mite  bis  |kyak  ito  >ip|S 


Hill  ^feSjk  toPEb^g  hie  JJa|  hie 

I  :kkl£  tokk  i£k  ^  P-jh>>  tile  h 


mil  kkfc  lkkh  Jkkk  toJkJs  :JttJJlt  ik  k 
Ikkp.  ^tob  kkj  to  hklkklh  kikh 


ok 


I IV)  1 1  :ite*kik?fc  Ik.-Sk  lkliJhS  :ikikj  k  yskk  kb  tole  lk 
I  :klkkj%  ikklk  lkhik  H  :felt  lie  kii  *k  kH(k 


3HIJ  OI1SATC  3HA  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


5.  O  Ray,  mayst  thou  be  with  us  and  play  with  us, 
unifying  thy  knowledge  with  the  shining  of  the  breath 
of  life;  may  those  flames  of  him  be  for  us  violent  and 
intense  and  keenly  whetted,  strong  to  carry  and  settled 
in  the  breast. 


Sukta  20 

1 .  O  Fire,  O  thou  who  art  most  strong  to  conquer  the 
plenitudes,  the  wealth  which  thou  holdest  in  mind  that 
make  full  of  inspiration  by  the  words  and  set  it  to  work 
in  the  gods  as  our  ally. 

2.  They  have  grown  on  thy  forceful  strength,  O  Fire, 
yet  impel  us  not  on  the  way,  they  fall  away  and  cleave 
to  the  hostility,  cleave  to  the  crookedness  of  one  who 
has  a  law  alien  to  thine. 

3.  Thee,  O  Fire,  the  ancient  one,  we  choose  in  our 
sacrifices  as  the  priest  of  the  call,  one  who  accomplishes 
a  discerning  knowledge,  and  bringing  the  pleasant 
offering  we  call  thee  by  the  word. 

4.  So  rightly  make  it  that  we  may  live  in  thy  protection 
and  that  we  may  grow  towards  the  Truth  day  by  day, 
O  forceful  Fire,  O  strong  in  will,  together  rejoicing  in  the 
light  of  the  Ray-Cow,  together  rejoicing  in  the  strength 
of  the  Heroes. 


297 


86S 


Uh\\  liaithkteab  is 

|  pfrfcPjPb^  IPIhfr  .Pb^Pltfr  P>jb* 


11*11  14}iy  IhP^H  jh-SIbV^K-  U2 

i  ^jm^bih  ibbbkjRbi^btbj  ^ 


l!*H  :fe^lhthj(h  frWtt  :PPiPPj\b  bPPtb  auk  :£hJP 

I  :tan  P(t»|PP>j<;lbbJ'bb^  ^  Jo^ 


llkll  ia^i2  %Jfe  IfcPPP'bhP 

I  P<fcPP%  (Plb^  ^Ph^P  ^fcb[  ibJ 

* 

iiin  jamfi  ^hui^b  i^p-Ip 

I  %tal  kijife  P^Pfr  bPih  ij  ^ 

Hill  J£i2  ^bb^  PI  b^  jyg'jbbapp  P>k> 
I  ^jjt|hJrtjB  PbqPP  kjitih  iij  U&a  ppqpp 


3  >113  DIXSAW  3H1  OX  SiYiMAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


SUKTA  21 

1.  As  the  human  we  set  thee  within  us,  as  the  human 
we  kindle  thee;  O  Fire,  O  Angiras,  as  the  human  offer 
sacrifice  to  the  gods  for  the  seeker  of  the  godheads. 

2.  O  Fire,  thou  art  kindled  in  the  human  being  and 
well-satisfied;  unceasing  ladles  go  to  thee,  O  perfect  in 
thy  birth,  O  thou  who  receivest  as  oblation  the  stream 
of  his  clarities! 

3.  Thee  all  the  gods  with  one  mind  of  acceptance  made 
their  envoy;  men  serving  thee  pray  thee  as  the  godhead 
in  their  sacrifices,  O  seer. 

4.  Let  mortal  man  with  will  to  the  divine  sacrifice  to 
you,  pray  to  the  divine  Fire;  O  brilliant  Flame,  high- 
kindled  shine;  mayst  thou  take  thy  seat  in  the  native  home 
of  the  Truth,  take  thy  seat  in  the  native  home  of  the 
peace. 


Sukta  22 

1.  O  thou  of  the  universal  peace,  as  the  Atri  sing  the 
word  of  illumination  to  Fire  of  the  purifying  light  who 
is  to  be  prayed  in  the  pilgrim-sacrifices,  the  priest  of  the 
call,  most  rapturous  in  man. 

2.  Set  within  you  Fire,  the  knower  of  all  things  born, 
as  the  divine  ordinant  of  the  rite;  let  your  sacrifice  march 
forward  today  most  strong  to  bring  the  epiphany  of  the 
gods. 


299 


00£ 


Uxli  *nh  piA  <felk  :£ki  lkafctt  Jail  kke 

I  kk  ilk  kjlhkj>.lnjhfr-k!ftej  JJfcta  Ij  k 


iiku  x£  ^it»  p-jho  xiy  fitt-k  xikil 
I  :b$jt»Pfefc  \mpfr  lki  Ij  %ikl 


Hell  :kkjlt  ikklk  lklk  Jkkkls  Jikk  Ij  Ik 
I  Ik  lie  fcklk  iyj>  foiPPh  p>hp 


Hill  p^pip  ktelk  IklfrOljnhE-M?  iteife} 
I  k&Ji  ilklls  b4P-ti>  ik  lkkilk  kke 


^  <£1 


llxll  :bk^k->Tit  :kjjk  (hk^h>Pk|P^  KHyfo  ifei  a 

I  Iklk  :kk  kt  k  MikS^JkJ  kke 


llkll  ljk±kie  Iklklk?.  kkS£  kAfri^te 
I  kkE  k^Hk  Ilk  kkhkkjifepy 


aaia  oixsaw  am  ox  skwah 


MANDALA  FIVE 


3.  Mortals  we  fix  our  minds  on  thee  the  godhead  who 
hast  the  mind  of  conscious  knowledge  for  the  protection 
as  we  journey,  for  the  guardian  supremely  desirable. 

4.  O  Fire,  become  conscious  of  this  in  us,  this  is  our 
word,  O  forceful  Flame:  O  strong-jawed  master  of  the 
house  this  is  thou  whom  the  Atris  magnify  with  their 
lauds,  whom  the  Atris  glorify  with  their  words. 


Sukta  23 

1.  O  Fire,  bring  by  the  force  of  the  light  a  forceful 
wealth  which  shall  overcome  by  thy  mouth  in  the 
plenitudes  all  the  peoples. 

2.  O  forceful  Fire,  bring  that  wealth  which  overcomes 
armies,  for  thou  art  the  true,  the  wonderful,  the  giver  of 
the  plenitude  of  the  Ray-Cows. 

3.  All  men  who  have  plucked  the  sacred  grass  with 
one  mind  of  acceptance  approach  thee,  the  beloved 
priest  of  the  call  in  their  houses  and  reach  in  thee  the 
multitude  of  desirable  things. 

4.  This  is  the  labourer  in  all  man’s  works  and  he  holds 
in  himself  an  all-besieging  force.  O  pure  brilliant  Flame, 
shine  out  full  of  joy  and  opulence  in  these  our  habitations, 
shine  out  full  of  light,  O  our  purifier. 


301 


IUU  £hb£  k>]<;]k$lbl-,=.$  ]b£tJK: 


licit  hr^bkjufejbS  it  £j|bbj  yiii  fcjjte 
I  th^kfo  £  IbOata  IhO^jb  (U>|h  JJj  & 


llkll  ££jlfcj£±£ 

I  ^J3^yaJ2  £££]££>£  kfej  Je£  h  ]l££  %  £ 


II  £ II  :£2J  Pjhh  IblPkllr.'faTk  fcg  Wl> 
I  :&2  lb  £  £J1£  ££  J&££tjj£  |k  1S2 £E 


v»k  m 


IU  life  II  :£*%£  |£^£k£  M£i&  £ 

l££ti££  :P!?mn>  Un  lt™i>kb£  itiJi  hjj£  |fc  £ 


II  ^lU II  :i£  £]1  £££js  ^J£  jLkissfikktjiSk 

I  :£a^£  ]££  (bit]  IPIb  jaa  ]£  £i  ££e 


jfe& 


3313  OI1SAH  3HA  Oi  SNI-VAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


Sukta  24 

1-2.  O  Will,  become  our  inmost  inmate,  become  aus¬ 
picious  to  us,  become  our  deliverer  and  our  armour  of 
protection.  Thou  who  art  the  lord  of  substance  and 
who  of  that  substance  hast  the  divine  knowledge,  come 
towards  us,  give  us  its  most  luminous  opulence. 

3-4.  Awake!  hear  our  call!  keep  us  far  from  all  that 
seeks  to  turn  us  to  evil.  O  shining  One,  O  Flame  of  purest 
Light,  thee  for  our  comrades  we  desire  that  even  now  they 
may  have  the  bliss  and  peace. 


Sukta  25 

1 .  Raise  thy  song  towards  the  Will,  towards  the  divine 
for  thy  increasing,  for  he  is  our  lord  of  substance  and  he 
lavishes;  he  is  the  son  of  the  seekers  of  knowledge;  he  is 
the  keeper  of  the  Truth  who  ferries  us  beyond  the  surge 
of  our  destroyers. 

2.  This  is  the  true  in  his  being  whom  the  seers  of  old 
kindled,  yea,  the  gods  too  kindled  him  with  perfect  out- 
shinings  into  his  wide  substance  of  the  light,  the  priest  of 
the  oblation  with  his  tongue  of  ecstasy. 

3.  O  Flame  supremely  desirable,  so  by  our  supreme 
thinking,  by  our  brightest  perfected  mentality,  by  its  utter 
cleaving  away  of  all  evil,  let  thy  light  give  unto  us  the  bliss. 

4.  The  Will  is  that  which  shines  out  in  the  gods,  the 
Will  is  that  which  enters  with  its  light  into  mortals,  the 
Will  is  the  carrier  of  our  oblation;  the  Will  seek  and 
serve  in  all  your  thoughts. 


303 


Il^ll  :BhSt  fefcUitX  :k2j  ajle  lfe£j=J  jk  B. 
I  :fefr&te  kijie  mb 


H?ll  :&£}  Ikhi  Bis  jkiki  lfefritea  a  m£. 
i  Mb  mfeJte  jama  aa 


us\ii  ^ijk£  mm  aimaji  ha  ajMjh 

I  jPblPbj  b-bbb  bbtbP  Oa^jlb  bb 


\\% ii  kPnji>hk>iau>  itokh.  jaiaijie 
i  :kjL  mb  jjj  kam  ajhm  ajmsatps 


nbu  tJsm  ajum  a£  ashman*  alls 

|  bhUblr.H^bbjfc  j+P->bK.bjE4b 


3>I1J  OII.SAIAI  3HX  OX  S.MWAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 

5.  The  Will  gives  to  the  giver  of  sacrifice  the  Son1  born 
of  his  works  who  teams  with  the  many  inspirations  and 
many  voices  of  the  soul,  the  highest,  the  unassailable,  the 
Master  of  things  who  opens  our  ears  to  the  knowledge. 


6.  Yea,  5tis  the  Will  gives  to  us  the  Lord  of  existences 
who  conquers  in  the  battle  by  souls  of  power;  Will  gives 
to  us  our  swift-galloping  steed  of  battle  ever  conquering, 
never  conquered. 


7.  That  which  is  strongest  in  us  to  upbear,  we  give  it 
to  the  Will.  Sing  out  the  Vast,  O  thou  whose  wide  sub¬ 
stance  is  its  light.  Thy  opulence  is  as  if  the  largeness  of 
the  Goddess2  herself;  upward  is  the  rush  of  thy  plenitudes. 


8.  Luminous  are  thy  flaming  radiances;  there  rises 
from  thee  a  vast  utterance  like  the  voice  of  the  pressing- 
stone  of  delight;  yea,  thy  cry  of  itself  rises  up  like  a  thunder- 
chant  from  the  heavens. 

9.  Thus,  desiring  substance,  we  adore  the  Will  who  is 
forceful  to  conquer.  May  he  who  has  the  perfect  power  of 
his  workings,  carry  us  beyond  all  the  forces  that  seek 
to  destroy  us,  like  a  ship  over  the  waters. 


1  The  Son  of  the  sacrifice  is  a  constant  image  in  the  Veda.  Here  it  is  the 
godhead  himself,  Agni  who  gives  himself  as  a  son  to  man,  a  Son  who  deli¬ 
vers  his  father.  Agni  is  also  the  War-Horse  and  the  steed  of  the  journey, 
the  White  Horse,  the  mystic  galloping  Dadhikravan  who  carries  us  through 
the  battle  to  the  goal  of  our  voyaging. 

2  Aditi,  the  vast  Mother. 


305 


90S 


II6MI  lPlk£  I  kh.<*)frjK?  j|pp(£  ftfc^Plte  liij 

ll^ll  :J&££  til  ipip^  I  PJfroK  :tiit3J±Jti 

n V)ii  hj^jp  pajp  i>p^  i  £b  tine  titiiS  hitiiiiteb 

itxu  |ityni  itia  >ip>£  i  hpn»fr»|hj^  Ijii  my%ay  tiite 

ufeu  bile  i  ljh\tenjti  tiihE  tiife  itia  R^tM£ 

u^n  £ti  ^p|p  ite  iti|  >  kliltii  jtiitetetij  Bi±\tibitik  itia  ti 

niuti:  tejti  tejti  tiiti^  ite  i  mltej  in^tt  uatij£  Jfetiih  tiite 

^  £& 


g’au  OIXSAH  3H1  OX  SMHAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


Sukta  26 

1.  O  Flame,  O  purifier,  bring  to  us  by  thy  tongue  of 
rapture,  O  god,  the  gods  and  offer  to  them  sacrifice. 

2.  Thou  who  drippest  the  clarity,  thou  of  the  rich 
and  varied  luminousness,  we  desire  thee  because  thou 
hast  the  vision  of  our  world  of  the  Truth.  Bring  to  us 
the  gods  for  their  manifesting.1 

3.  O  Seer,  we  kindle  thee  in  thy  light  and  thy  vastness 
in  the  march  of  our  sacrifice  who  carriest  the  offerings 
on  their  journey. 

4.  Come,  O  Will,  with  all  the  godheads  for  the  giving 
of  the  oblation ;  thee  we  accept  as  the  priest  of  the  offering. 

5.  For  the  sacrificer  who  presses  the  wine  of  his  delight, 
bring,  O  Flame,  a  perfect  energy.  Sit  with  the  gods 
on  the  seat  of  the  soul’s  fullness. 

6.  O  Flame,  thou  burnest  high  and  increasest  the  divine 
laws  and  art  the  conqueror  of  a  thousandfold  riches; 
thou  art  the  messenger  of  the  gods  who  hast  the  word. 


7.  Set  within  you  the  Flame  who  knows  the  births, 
bearer  of  the  offering,  youngest  vigour,  divine  sacrificer 
in  the  seasons  of  the  Truth. 


1  Or,  “for  the  journeying”  to  the  luminous  world  of  the  Truth,  or  “for 
the  eating”  of  the  oblations. 


307 


808 


il ill  kite  Ucalte 

I  -b^bk  ^>f»K>  (OaPj^  lbll>  &  ^HPjhPk  IkikXkK 


<te  m 


ll'bll  itefej  Ihbk  :jttlk|  I  riakfe  XiiUk  :tel±J  lkteijte  tkXto  kh 


II7II  MUoki  I  :KP^bi7»b^  ifrlrhHteh  tete  is 


•ran  oixsai\  anx  ox  snhah 


MANDALA  FIVE 


8.  Today  let  thy  sacrifice  march  forward  unceasingly, 
thy  sacrifice  that  shall  bring  the  whole  epiphany  of  the 
godheads.  Strew  the  seat  of  thy  soul  that  there  they 
may  sit. 


9.  There  let  the  Life-powers1  take  their  seat  and  the 
Riders  of  the  Horse2  and  the  Lord  of  Love3  and  the  Lord 
of  Wideness,4  even  the  gods  with  all  their  nation. 


Sukta  27 

1.  O  Will,  O  Universal  Power,5  the  mighty  One 
supreme  in  vision,  master  of  his  being,  lord  of  his  pleni¬ 
tudes  has  given  me  his  two  cows  of  the  Light  that  draw 
his  wain.  He  of  the  triple  dawn,  son  of  the  triple  Bull,6 
has  awakened  to  knowledge  with  the  ten  thousands7 
of  his  plenitude. 


1  The  Maruts 

2  The  twin  Aswins 

3  Mitra 

4  Varuna 

5  or,  Godhead, 

6  The  Triple  Bull  is  Indra,  lord  of  the  three  luminous  realms  of  Swar,  the 
Divine  Mind;  Tryaruna  Trasadasyu  is  the  half-god,  man  turned  into  the 
Indra  type;  therefore  he  is  described  by  all  the  usual  epithets  of  Indra, 
<cAsura”,  ccSatpati,,J  “Maghavan”.  The  triple  dawn  is  the  dawn  of  these 
three  realms  on  the  human  mentality. 

7  Thousand  symbolises  absolute  completeness.  But  there  arc  ten  subtle 
powers  of  the  illumined  mind  each  of  which  has  to  have  its  entire  plenitude. 


309 


0I£ 


llxu  PMPPIhifr»i>t>  Ph  up  IP.PPP 
l  mh^Pi;>PP.^K  bj£  ii  jb 


IlfcH  bjilnlt  kJlP\>fehibK  h^pik'Pjfc»i>j  ^  jfc 

I  tlkfeiite  hhh  JblSabJk  |M*P  Pjpfc  bite  ^  Ush 


llb.ll  hte  i2Uflbte  £2jj>  P^PIhPIP  (P?o&  >P)btb 
i  bji>.x>  m=.B  m»h  b  \±k  ip(p  t±  pjitpj  &  mis  b  it 


gw  oixsapm  hhj.  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  five 


2.  He  gives  to  me  the  hundred  and  twenty1  of  the 
cows  of  dawn;  his  two  shining2  horses  he  gives,  yoked 
to  the  car,  that  bear  aright  the  yoke.  O  Will,  O  Universal 
Power,  do  thou  rightly  affirmed  and  increasing  extend 
peace  and  bliss  to  the  lord  of  the  triple  dawn. 

3.  For  thus  has  he  done  desiring  thy  grace  of  mind, 
new-given  for  him,  new-manifested, — he,  the  disperser 
of  the  destroyers,3  the  lord  of  the  triple  dawn  who  with 
attentive  mind  gives  response  to  the  many  words  of  my 
many  births.4 

4.  May  he  who  answers  to  me  with  assent  give  to  the 
illumined  giver  of  the  Horse-sacrifice,5  by  the  word  of 
illumination,  possession  of  the  goal  of  his  journey;  may 
he  give  power  of  intelligence  to  the  seeker  of  the  Truth. 


1  The  symbolic  figure  of  the  illuminations  of  divine  knowledge  as  the 
series  of  dawns  (cows)  of  the  twelve  months  of  the  year  and  twelve  periods 
of  the  sacrifice.  There  are  again  ten  times  twelve  to  correspond  to  the  ten 
subtle  sisters,  powers  of  the  illumined  mentality. 

2  The  two  shining  horses  of  Indra  identical  probably  with  the  two  cows 
of  light  of  the  first  verse;  they  are  the  two  vision-powers  of  the  supramental 
Truth-consciousness,  right-hand  and  left-hand,  probably  direct  truth-dis¬ 
cernment  and  intuition.  As  cows  symbolising  light  of  knowledge  they  yoke 
themselves  to  the  material  mind,  the  wain;  as  horses  symbolising  power  of 
knowledge  to  the  chariot  of  Indra,  the  liberated  pure  mind. 

a  Trasadasyu;  in  all  things  he  reproduces  the  characteristics  of  Indra. 

4  The  seer  by  this  self-fulfilment  on  the  higher  plane  is  born,  as  it  were, 
into  many  realms  of  consciousness  and  from  each  of  these  there  go  up  its 
words  that  express  the  impulses  in  it  which  seek  a  divine  fulfilment.  The 
Mind-Soul  answers  to  these  and  gives  assent,  it  supplies  to  the  word  of  ex¬ 
pression  the  answering  word  of  illumination  and  to  the  Life  that  seeks  the 
Trudi  it  gives  the  power  of  intelligence  that  finds  and  holds  the  Truth. 

5  The  Horse-sacrifice  is  the  offering  of  the  Life-power  with  all  its  impulses, 
desires,  enjoyments  to  the  divine  existence.  The  Life-soul  (Dwita)  is  itself 
the  giver  of  this  sacrifice  which  it  performs  when  by  the  power  of  Agni  it 
attends  to  vision  on  its  own  vital  plane,  when  it  becomes,  in  the  figure  of  the 
hymn,  the  illumined  seer,  asvamedha. 


311 


SIS 


libit  k  mi  t  bj  jnfejS  mfe  i±  Mbj 

|  HJI*I>  it>pT»k>  ipih^hjp 


iiiii  \MPh  mrnjl  uasa|  muyum  mtmmj  mm  pjii 
I  iyiit  jy  mbjhtmsgmti  kfauym  tejfrjfaijie 


?h  ife& 


ii^ii  biimmtjjm  Mjij  k£i>  mam  ms 
i  tmm£  jrmmirnmms  ltiim 


iikii  :ayms  jal  myi  :mm  baqiiaie 
i  :mkh  utt  tab 


aaia  o  us  aim  a  hi  ox  snjmah 


MANDALA  FIVE 


5.  A  hundred  strong  bulls  of  the  diffusion1  raise  me  up 
to  joy;  the  gifts  of  the  sacrificer  of  the  steed  are  as  out¬ 
pourings  of  the  wine  of  delight  with  their  triple  infusions.2 

6.  May  the  God-Mind  and  the  God-Will  uphold  in 
the  sacrificer  of  the  Horse  and  giver  of  his  hundred  a 
perfect  energy  and  a  vast  force  of  battle  even  as  in  heaven 
the  Son  of  Light  indestructible.3 


Sukta  28 

1.  The  Flame  of  Will  burning  high  rises  to  his  pure 
light  in  the  heaven  of  mind ;  wide  he  extends  his  illumina¬ 
tion  and  fronts  the  Dawn.  She  comes,  moving  upward, 
laden  with  all  desirable  things,  seeking  the  gods  with 
the  oblation,  luminous  with  the  clarity. 

2.  When  thou  burnest  high  thou  art  king  of  immortality 
and  thou  cleavest  to  the  doer  of  sacrifice  to  give  him  that 
blissful  state;  he  to  whom  thou  comest  to  be  his  guest, 
holds  in  himself  all  substance  and  he  sets  thee  within 
in  his  front. 


1  The  complete  hundred  powers  of  the  Life  by  whom  all  the  abundance  of 
the  vital  plane  is  showered  upon  the  growing  man.  The  vital  forces  being  the 
instrument  of  desire  and  enjoyment,  this  diffusion  is  like  the  outpouring  of 
the  wine  of  delight  that  raises  the  soul  to  new  and  intoxicating  joys. 

2  The  delight  extracted  from  existence  is  typefied  by  the  honey  wine  of 
the  Soma ;  it  is  mixed  with  the  milk,  the  curds  and  the  grain,  the  milk  being 
that  of  the  luminous  cows,  the  curds  the  fixation  of  their  yield  in  the  intel¬ 
lectual  mind  and  the  grain  the  formulation  of  the  light  in  the  force  of  the 
physical  mind.  These  symbolic  senses  are  indicated  by  the  double  meaning 
of  the  words  used,  go,  dadhi ,  yava. 

3  Perfect  and  vast  energy  in  the  vital  being  corresponding  to  the  infinite 
and  immortal  light  of  the  Truth  in  the  mental  being. 


313 


Il^ll  | 


us 


llViU  HJ2ifei22^  %  ^  I  Iklfei  %|2  MPfr  P§IK>  tas  (9-hJP 


11*11  JihaJaaj^aiUi  HJJs  ikiiaE  Jittok 
l  kilty  kt!  p>c^Spk  h-i&kjP 


ufeu  Hjiltt  me)  jftjj±Uinki5  iwn>if>  h^h^ip  a 

i  §at  yiamtiiiiafi  na  taiaya  tas  tits 


3313  OI1SAW  3HA  Ol  SNHAH 


MANDALA  FIVE 


3.  O  Flame,  put  forth  thy  battling  might  for  a  vast 
enjoyment1  of  bliss,  may  there  be  thy  highest  illumination; 
create  a  well-governed  union  of  the  Lord  and  his  Spouse, 
set  thy  foot  on  the  greatness  of  hostile  powers. 

4.  I  adore,  O  Flame,  the  glory  of  thy  high-blazing 
mightiness.  Thou  art  the  Bull  with  the  illuminations;  thou 
burnest  up  in  the  march  of  our  sacrifices. 

5.  O  Flame  that  receivest  our  offerings,  perfect  guide 
of  the  sacrifice,  high-kindled  offer  our  oblation  to  the 
godheads;  for  thou  art  the  bearer  of  our  offerings. 

6.  Cast  the  offering,  serve  the  Will  with  your  works2 
while  your  sacrifice  moves  forward  to  its  goal,  accept 
the  carrier  of  our  oblation. 


1  The  Vedic  immortality  is  a  vast  beatitude,  a  large  enjoyment  of  the 
divine  and  infinite  existence  reposing  on  a  perfect  union  between  the  Soul 
and  Nature;  the  soul  becomes  King  of  itself  and  its  environment,  conscious 
on  all  its  planes,  master  of  them,  with  Nature  for  its  bride  delivered  from 
divisions  and  discords  into  an  infinite  and  luminous  harmony. 

2  Or,  set  the  Will  to  its  workings 


315 


MANDALA  SIX 


SIS 


UV>U  kHr.ltaUlk-.HjSk  IPIk  MhJ  :it  JMJ£  mife  M 

I  hiuiuu.  ^HlhkE  Mi  iM  IMbJh  :M^J  M)bb  1M 


11*11  \&k&  MM  £  1M£H  tjlMSJfc  ^fejb  £bj  bJlUM 
I  kPfckkhitt  Mss  :M>iMss  :Mte  MMi  Mfe£  bb 


nMi  umbsps  iSbtbj  p^frihfr  Mib 

I  Mu  tie  |kifeLite  bji  J^iMbMtjib  Mb  b^fe 


llhll  Mu  ME  |P*hPkj  Mi  ^J±  \Mbbb  itfeb  :ib  1M  b 

|  Mi  :kS|ktataS  ShHAUjltalPh  pmti‘  Mjl  IMS 


Hill  teM  bibbbj  ^  Bl>?^(jn$.Ebfe  Jtt  M 

I  1M^  bib  tbbte  IpbJ  IMSIMph  yatelS  Mil  M 


*  m 


BHARADWAJA  BARHASPATYA 


SUKTA  1 

1.  O  potent  Fire,  thou  wert  the  first  thinker  of  this 
thought  and  the  priest  of  the  call.  O  Male,  thou  hast 
created  everywhere  around  thee  a  force  invulnerable 
to  overpower  every  force. 

2.  And  now  strong  for  sacrifice,  thou  hast  taken  thy 
session  in  the  seat  of  aspiration,  one  aspired  to,  a  flamen 
of  the  call,  an  imparter  of  the  impulse.  Men,  building 
the  godheads  have  grown  conscious  of  thee,  the  chief 
and  first,  and  followed  to  a  mighty  treasure. 

3.  In  thee  awake,  they  followed  after  the  Treasure  as 
in  the  wake  of  one  who  walks  on  a  path  with  many  posses¬ 
sions,  in  the  wake  of  the  vast  glowing-visioned  embodied 
Fire  that  casts  its  light  always  and  for  ever. 

4.  Travellers  with  surrender  to  the  plane  of  the  god¬ 
head,  seekers  of  inspired  knowledge,  they  won  an  inviolate 
inspiration,  they  held  the  sacrificial  Names  and  had 
delight  in  thy  happy  vision. 

5.  The  peoples  increase  thee  on  the  earth;  both  kinds  of 
riches  of  men  increase  thee.  O  Fire,  our  pilot  through  the 
battle,  thou  art  the  deliverer  of  whom  we  must  know, 
ever  a  father  and  mother  to  human  beings. 


319 


Uiilliyut  fej  ilifei  fcXX^jai  :&ia£j$a 

i  tihj^feis  j.am  a}  a±aaia  ik 


uo^n  h^h  ^paS  jM£k  ^  lihfekhj^t  tala  \a&  ja% 
I  H^aiya  axthj^aa  ithtej  |ht  Ijh  e  £  lhiie 


n'bii  :a*ai  ^J3S  iaia  a  p^aja^aa  ia^  ijh  ajlne  a 
i  apji^a^  iaaja  sans  a±a  jaa  a  ^isjs  fc|  aae  m 


ll?n  Wlln^hV  pah  htjhP-.ai>  ftfelh 

|  kiu^ahh.  Ptab  UHpPPj  IP|Pbi;lt  P^hfcbj  h|'*j  llttbj 


ne\n  aaajx  ia£a  aas  jaaj  jausia  mais  liaaj  a^ 
i  :p^hh^  |a|  aaiaiS  an±a>a  j&iS  aa  ia>  a 


u^n  a^a  xaaa  jaiai-  haaiaa&a  us  aa  aa  ia>  a 
i  aiai&a  xaiaa  a>  >£±a  lajiaijasaj  laaj  a  :aaaaa 


aau  DIXSAI\T  3HX  OX  S.MNAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


6.  Dear  and  servable  is  this  Fire  in  men;  a  rapturous 
priest  of  the  call  has  taken  up  his  session,  strong  for 
sacrifice.  Pressing  the  knee  may  we  come  to  thee  with  obei¬ 
sance  of  surrender  when  thou  flamest  alight  in  the  house. 

7.  O  Fire,  we  desire  thee,  the  god  to  whom  must  rise 
our  cry,  we  the  right  thinkers,  the  seekers  of  bliss,  the 
builders  of  the  godheads.  O  Fire,  shining  with  light  thou 
leadest  men  through  the  vast  luminous  world  of  heaven. 

8.  To  the  seer,  the  Master  of  creatures  who  rules 
over  the  eternal  generations  of  peoples,  the  Smiter,  the 
Bull  of  those  that  see,  the  mover  to  the  journey  beyond 
who  drives  us,  the  purifying  Flame,  the  Power  in  the 
sacrifice,  Fire  the  Regent  of  the  Treasures! 

9.  O  Fire,  the  mortal  has  done  his  sacrifice  and  achieved 
his  labour  who  has  worked  out  the  gift  of  the  oblation 
with  the  fuel  of  thy  flame  and  wholly  learned  the  way 
of  the  offering  by  his  prostrations  of  surrender;  he  lives 
in  thy  guard  and  holds  in  himself  all  desirable  things. 

10.  O  Fire,  O  son  of  Force,  may  we  offer  to  thy  great¬ 
ness  that  which  is  great,  worshipping  thee  with  the 
obeisance  and  the  fuel  and  the  offering,  the  altar  and  the 
word  and  the  utterance.  For  we  would  work  and  strive 
in  thy  happy  right  thinking,  O  Fire. 

11.0  thou  who  art  filled  with  inspiration  and  a  passer 
of  barriers,  O  thou  who  hast  extended  earth  and  heaven 
by  the  wideness  of  thy  light  and  thy  inspired  discoveries 
of  knowledge,  shine  wider  yet  in  us  with  thy  large  and 
solid  and  opulent  amassings,  O  Fire. 


321 


nxii  k  u  y*£ 

I  Hkiiis  :kJ±  lfcfej  %blfe&  ^Bte3fe 


llfell  ^J=2te  |*.Mt]k.-tfi  :kl£  ^pih  ia  2h 
I^J3dty£%  h±£b  Jik  ^ 


llklt  :lnJtoti.|ai;taj^>U'>  Ifci 

I  (hlntab.  Iha  $J  lb-> 


IlillliJtoE  k  £a]S  Ikk  ItJrs  tobfefe}  ta 
I  J±  (fchj  Pi^tfcPPKt  fei 

h  m 


UfciH  ^  kjfr»  £fekj  Bia  kjdteiH  >.ImE  Ij  Ihpih 
I  Wlhtfr  ^  IpBP'P'IV  kjfela  ihltP  Usk£  Khn-frli 


\\h.ln  £iH  pjippfeip  lEit  %iie 

I  :Mh  klkkk  hl^lk  >JJtt  IftPfrfa 


a-au  DIXSAJM  3HX  OX  SMI'VAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


12.  O  Prince  of  Riches,  fix  always  in  us  that  in  which 
are  the  Gods,  settle  here  many  herds  for  the  begotten 
son.  In  us  may  there  be  the  happy  things  of  true  inspira¬ 
tion  and  the  multitude  of  the  large  impulsions  from 
which  evil  is  far. 

13.  O  King,  O  Fire,  let  me  enjoy  by  thee  and  thy 
princehood  of  the  riches  many  riches  in  many  ways; 
for,  O  Fire  of  many  blessings,  there  are  many  treasures 
for  thy  worshipper  in  thee,  the  King. 


Sukta  2 

1.  O  Fire,  thou  travellest  like  a  friend  to  the  glory 
where  is  our  home.  O  wide-seeing  Prince  of  the  Treasure, 
thou  nurturest  our  inspiration  and  our  growth. 

2.  Men  who  see  aspire  to  thee  with  the  word  and  the 
sacrifice.  To  thee  comes  the  all-seeing  Horse  that  crosses 
the  mid-world,  the  Horse  that  no  wolf  tears. 

3.  The  Men  of  Heaven  with  a  single  joy  set  thee  alight 
to  be  the  eye  of  intuition  of  the  sacrifice  when  this  human 
being,  this  seeker  of  bliss,  casts  his  offering  in  the  pilgrim- 
rite. 

4.  The  mortal  should  grow  in  riches  who  achieves  the 
work  by  the  Thought  for  thee,  the  great  giver;  he  is  in 
the  keeping  of  the  Vast  Heaven  and  crosses  beyond  the 
hostile  powers  and  their  evil. 


323 


fZ£ 


tlUll  ik 

»P>jS  kjkiie  JkSiJk  JkiJ  kl&J&  ^ 

I  :uv>t>i>  Piwfc  p>pip;>  k£  |$pppj  jk  lfiaie 


iio^n  :>.^jHh^  p^pp  1^  PhtPj  4tehH 
I  WntPj  jjk  ik*£  p>PiPni>iarl  h]h 


U\>tl  :PPfcitj  P-jPtP  ikk  IMS  m2  1  Ufctife 
1  \»PP  Pith  P^IPhappj  ki 


11711  :lsiy  :fclM  k  ^Jisyik  ihki  Ptj*Xjh 
I  :bo>&  k  jU'IP  P^^hJNtP  Jx4£  Bj  IP*fc 


lie\ll  :pt!ppp  kkfi  :hk  kjl£  :knl 

I  :fejkpe  4*  lhisj  kjsjkkjte&kj  £}  Ifele 


ll^ll  ^pi>  -PPih  lh£  hi  lkE  k 
1  :ppih>  iyk}  kjfepjfe  hJa  ^hPi 


llVill  PhPiPit  kikkAS  kJkaS  k  P-*PUife 

I  PitP  PiitjPj  p^Iiip  mu  lfehjk 


3313  01  AS  AN  3 HI  OX  SMIAIAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


5.  O  Fire,  when  mortal  man  arrives  by  the  fuel  of  thy 
flame  to  the  way  of  the  oblation  and  the  sharpening  of 
thy  intensities,  he  increases  his  branching  house,  his 
house  of  the  hundred  of  life. 

6.  The  smoke  from  thy  blaze  journeys  and  in  heaven 
is  outstretched  brilliant-white.  O  purifying  Fire,  thou 
shinest  with  a  flame  like  the  light  of  the  sun. 

7.  Now  art  thou  here  in  men,  one  to  be  aspired  to  and 
a  beloved  guest;  for  thou  art  like  one  delightful  and 
adorable  in  the  city  and  as  if  our  son  and  a  traveller  of 
the  triple  world. 

8.  O  Fire,  thou  art  driven  by  the  will  in  our  gated 
house  like  a  horse  apt  for  our  work;  thou  art  by  thy 
nature  like  a  far-spreading  mansion  and  like  a  galloper 
of  winding  ways  and  a  little  child. 

9.  O  Fire,  thou  art  like  a  beast  in  thy  pasture  and 
devourest  even  the  unfallen  things;  the  lustres  of  thy 
blaze  tear  to  pieces  the  woodlands,  O  ageless  Flame. 

10.  O  Fire,  thou  comest  a  priest  of  the  call  into  the 
house  of  men  that  do  the  Rite  of  the  Path.  Make  us 
complete  in  the  treasure,  O  Master  of  men!  O  Angiras 
flame-seer,  rejoice  in  our  oblation. 

11.0  Fire,  O  friendly  Light,  O  Godhead,  turn  to  the 
Godheads,  mayst  thou  speak  for  us  the  true  thought  of 
Earth  and  Heaven;  move  to  the  peace  and  the  happy 
abode  and  the  men  of  Heaven.  Let  us  pass  beyond  the 
foe  and  the  sin  and  the  stumbling;  let  us  pass  beyond 
these  things,  pass  in  thy  keeping  through  them  safe. 


325 


9Z£ 


IIV,||  i?Ja£  kJ^le 

ikilfe  k  Piise^jbaPj^it?.  jijis  k 


llXllk&fe  klfe  .'jjtifelB  bfej.2  fclsih 

I  mils  mp*i?  i±  jxixah  J2iiE  |.bfe  ^Jit  h.^.Pj  l±±aj 


ll£ll  aataPJiil?.  JldS  :)PfcPbtP  .U?.iii£  :Pkih^ 

I  :ya  lie  p->p^  pj^b  litut.  ih)XPjitl  i2il2  t  1XH 


Hill  :i^jjiiS  k  im±  Ph  H  life  ikl 

|  l&llab  hP>lhlVlSh1lkPj)klii  finite  :HjPfr 


Mill  :^J±.PJi  UiMiUi  i±J.lh  ^  lltljea  .-inife  lafeiy  Jsi  fc 
I  2akb^  k£  llxalfe  IXPfrhft  H  kiie 


£  Mt 


■JilU  3IXSAXJ  3HX  OX  SNWH 


MANDALA  SIX 


SUKTA  3 

1 .  The  mortal  who  longs  for  the  Godhead  shall  take 
up  his  home  with  thee,  O  Fire,  he  is  born  into  the  Truth 
and  a  guardian  of  the  Truth  and  comes  to  thy  wide 
Light, — he  in  whom  thou  being  Varuna  takest  with 
Mitra  a  common  delight  and  thou  guard est  that  mortal, 
O  God,  by  thy  casting  away  from  him  of  evil. 

2.  He  has  sacrificed  with  sacrifices,  he  has  achieved 
his  labour  by  his  works,  he  has  given  to  the  Fire  whose 
boons  grew  ever  in  opulence.  And  so  there  befalls  him 
not  the  turning  away  of  the  Glorious  Ones;  evil  comes 
not  to  him  nor  the  insolence  of  the  adversary. 

3.  Faultless  is  thy  seeing  like  the  sun’s;  terrible  marches 
thy  thought  when  blazing  with  light  thou  ncighest  aloud 
like  a  force  of  battle.  This  Fire  was  born  in  the  pleasant 
woodland  and  is  a  rapturous  dweller  somewhere  in  the 
night. 

4.  Fiery-sharp  is  his  march  and  great  his  body, — he 
is  like  a  horse  that  eats  and  champs  with  his  mouth:  he 
casts  his  tongue  like  an  axe  to  every  side,  like  a  smelter 
he  melts  the  log  that  he  burns. 

5.  He  sets  like  an  archer  his  shaft  for  the  shooting,  he 
sharpens  his  powers  of  light  like  an  edge  of  steel.  He  is 
the  traveller  of  the  night  with  rich  rapid  movements; 
he  has  thighs  of  swift  motion  and  is  like  a  bird  that 
settles  on  a  tree. 


327 


[\hn  MtbJbJtsih  IXiiK  ^frftlbSfej 

I  kb  kJJS±fektJ>iaib  .bifiJiSfe  ibihiy  ^  b 


win  jyajb  'Pitp'  hifej£l;ii‘.u±b  ixim  me  lbh 
i  (kto  jki  iw>iob^  <tikti^  lfeb 

a  <i& 


II7II  kjsie  ifcm.H.4.  j£i%}  fckib  Wbb  Ibbli  m  lb  ysis 
I  :^ti;  K.1abj^>-RJh4>  \p  ifebjlblla 


lic\ll  y,'lh£  b  il±£b  JbbJi  Ibib  lhlf>h  IbbX?.  Jh  k  Uab 
I  kk  kr-lilie  Ka  lk%Jbb  JbbbJ  bib  k  lbbj 


11*11  kk  lbbj  Ip.  ^bbJte  jbbk  lbbj  lb  1MH|  Jet  k&k 
1  Jlktbkj  iyyaili  iiabjllk  :llb£  bib  HJJ5  b  liU  £  b 


3HI3  DIXSAW  3HX  OX  SMIMAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


6.  This  friendly  Light  is  like  a  singer  of  the  word  and 
clothes  himself  with  the  Rays,  he  rhapsodises  with  his 
flame.  This  is  the  shining  One  who  journeys  by  night 
and  by  day  to  the  Gods,  the  shining  Immortal  who 
journeys  through  the  day  to  the  Gods. 

7.  The  cry  of  him  is  like  the  voice  of  ordaining  Hea¬ 
ven;1  he  is  the  shining  Bull  that  bellows  aloud  in  the 
growths  of  the  forest.  He  goes  with  his  light  and  his 
race  and  his  running  and  Alls  Earth  and  Heaven  with 
his  riches;  they  are  like  wives  happy  in  their  spouse. 

8.  He  flashes  like  the  lightning  with  his  own  proper 
strength,  his  own  founding  and  helpful  illuminations. 
As  if  heaven’s  craftsman  he  has  fashioned  the  army  of 
the  Life-Gods  and  lightens  ablaze  in  his  exultant  speed. 


Sukta  4 

1.  O  Son  of  Force,  O  priest  of  the  call,  even  as  always 
in  man’s  forming  of  the  godhead  thou  sacrificest  with 
his  sacrifices,  sacrifice  so  for  us  to  the  Gods  today,  O 
Fire,  an  equal  power  to  equal  powers,  one  who  desires 
to  the  Gods  who  desire. 

2.  He  is  wide  in  his  light  like  a  seer  of  the  Day;  he  is 
the  one  we  must  know  and  founds  an  adorable  joy.  In 
him  is  universal  life,  he  is  the  Immortal  in  mortals;  he 
is  the  Waker  in  the  Dawn,  our  Guest,  the  Godhead  who 
knows  all  births  that  are. 


1  or,  the  cry  of  him  in  his  worship  of  sacrifice  is  like  the  voice  of  Heaven; 


329 


OSS 


II6MI  :ikPk  lkkXl  HiJJiih  kik  tPfr^  m>l^.  JJ2i  k  Sil 
I  :k  Bpt  fo+fc>toU»\lfc*l+hPS-»h  Ilk 


ll^ll  kfcy>  k  yfilSjySkih  lk%yi£  :kkkXU±k  AJikkk  yjkJ 

i  uiik  kj  yi^i  kikk  k^>.£jkkm,  k  jk&  ne 


Hill  k’jlLkJh  :kkh  :k*M  k 

I  klWh-'h^U  kilt; 


kit  k^h£ 

\p- 


llxll  :kikaK  %kkfc  kteil  Ik  kiE  kkkiE  k  tk  k 
I  hk.lhx>ibkkk>JH>  »,k  )gPteh->H>  yk&  ^  lkk 


llfell  injjiwfetei'W^jitJ  kkk&syfeklh  tiikkykS  jb  kj 
I  :>kik  k  ksk  yik  ftjiwik  \p  h^hkh  k£k  k  JkLE 


3HU  DIXSAW  HHX  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


3.  The  heavens  seem  to  praise  his  giant  might;  he  is 
robed  in  lustre  and  brilliant  like  the  Sun.  Ageless  the 
purifying  Fire  moves  abroad  and  cuts  down  even  the 
ancient  things  of  the  Devourer.1 

4.  O  Son,  thou  art  the  speaker,  thy  food  is  thy  seat; 
Fire  from  his  very  birth  has  made  his  food  the  field  of 
his  race.  O  Strength-getter,  found  strength  in  us!  Thou 
conquercst  like  a  king  and  thy  dwelling  is  within,  there 
where  there  comes  not  any  render. 

5.  He  eats  his  food  and  sharpens  his  sword  of  defence; 
he  is  like  the  Life-God  a  master  of  kingdoms  and  passes 
beyond  the  nights.  O  Fire,  may  we  pierce  through  the 
foe,  O  thou  who  breakest  like  a  galloping  steed  all  that 
battle  against  thy  appointings,  hurting  around  thee  our 
hurters  as  they  fall  upon  us. 

6.  O  Fire,  thou  art  like  the  Sun  with  thy  splendid 
illuminations  and  hast  wide  extended  Earth  and  Heaven 
with  thy  light.  Smeared  with  lustre,2  rich  in  brilliance 
he  shepherds  away  the  darkness  and  like  a  son  of  the 
desire  of  the  Gods  rushes  onward  in  his  march. 

7.  We  have  chosen  thee  most  rapturous  with  the 
flaming  lights  of  thy  illuminations;  O  Fire,  hear  for  us 
that  which  is  great.  O  Godhead  of  Fire,  the  most  strong 
Gods  fill  thee  like  Indra  with  might  and  like  the  Life- 
God  with  riches. 


1  or,  the  enjover. 

a  or,  anointed  with  light, 


331 


11*11  felteShk  it^hP  £ahjk  kJkktjJ&kkR^kk 

I  piitopp  ($kfchj  |>P-»k>  ^  kikMkkJK:  ljkhk  :k  Jto 


U ^ II  kjkk  ^^PlP>hPlhc  Etiiy  kjlkl  me 

I  WiinihiP  jmtiitei  liPii  kie  idk  :k£Jk  fekj  m 


llb.ll  %Mh  ^kik  kjllkqk  ^Jli  PJIPPP  lkiiiy  kkliS 

I  kjfek 


mil  kl-sis  ir.ji>ippchj  IP^K  j^iinfejjs  kjk;S  n 

I  hP-jPJhkjPjti  p-ibh^kPlbh  Ikkk  k&  :k  %1 

V|  <fe& 


l|?ll  :ll±ljm£  k£k  ki£  kjli  ^inlt  Jk*iJ&  ik 

I  :£kah  :kjkjh  :Mi  kj%  kijki  :kji|kskk£  Ik  k 


a-au  oixsajv  a  hi  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  SIX 


8.  O  Fire,  thou  journeyest  happily  to  the  treasures 
by  paths  where  the  wolf  rends  not,  and  carriest  us  beyond 
all  evils.  These  high  things  thou  givest  to  the  luminous 
wise;  thou  lavishest  the  bliss  on  him  who  voices  thee 
with  the  word.  May  we  revel  in  rapture,  strong  with  the 
strength  of  the  Heroes,  living  a  hundred  winters. 


Sukta  5 

1.  I  call  to  you  by  my  thoughts,  Fire,  the  youngest 
of  the  gods  in  whose  words  is  no  bale,  the  Youth,  the 
Son  of  Force.  He  is  a  mind  of  the  knowledge  free  from 
all  that  hurts ;  his  gifts  are  many  and  he  journeys  to  the 
riches  where  all  boons  are. 

2.  O  Priest  of  the  call,  priest  with  thy  many  flame- 
forces,1  in  the  night  and  in  the  light  the  Lords  of  sacrifice 
cast  on  thee  their  treasures.  As  in  earth  are  founded  all 
the  worlds,  they  founded  all  happinesses  in  the  purifying 

Fire. 

3.  Thou  art  the  Ancient  of  Days  and  hast  taken  thy 
seat  in  these  peoples  and  becomest  by  the  will  their 
charioteer  of  desirable  things.  O  Conscient,  O  thou 
who  knowest  all  births  that  are,  thou  walkest  wide  for 
thy  worshipper  in  unbroken  order  to  the  Treasures. 

4.  O  Fire,  O  friendly  Light,  O  most  burning  Power, 
the  enemy  who  is  hidden  and  would  destroy  us,  the 
enemy  who  is  within  us  and  would  conquer,  leap  fiery- 
forceful  with  thy  affliction  of  flame  and  consume  him 
with  thy  male  and  ageless  fires. 


1  or,  forms  of  flame, 


a24 


333 


tlhll  kfeit  PjihP>P>jhJkh  :XXlh  :h 

I  :2sJyx!g:jkl^kkj^lsK:  U?,ikk|A  B 


Ilill  kjlki£j  tekj  llkl|  lXtk  iiilltroin  kSUSk 

I  :Hih«a§  PhSlH  BBh  :b£e  Ittteh  B 


^  <£& 


IIOII  £  >lr'l>P'hPtk  hlk^^htMP  kjHP-IP  hlhttt 
I  h^^feS  :kbJX  tojl  kihtk>  y^M  feibkL'fe  X  klkite 


ll^ll  hik  JsjJfcSljJ*  XiXkikikjyik  JkfelitJlk  yirtgak 
I  klkiik  teifelfe  ysk  H>HHP->Phj^h^P  B 


UV,M  jyutt  XJ  lkJ=te  kkiiS  lbli  IkfeK  kltkaikj±  B 

i  Piti^t.  litkp  y±&  :iAji-jLfei.>£:  h  mtyk  y±b 


3HU  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  S.VIYAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


5.  When  man  gives  to  thee  with  the  sacrifice  and  the 
fuel  and  with  his  spoken  words  and  his  chants  of  illu¬ 
mination,  he  becomes,  O  Immortal,  O  Son  of  force,  a 
mind  of  knowledge  among  mortals  and  shines  with  the 
riches  and  inspiration  and  light. 

6.  Missioned  create  that  swiftly,  O  Fire.  Force  is 
thine,  resist  with  thy  force  our  confronters.  When 
revealed  by  thy  lights,  thou  art  formulated  by  our  words, 
rejoice  in  the  far-sounding  thought  of  thy  adorer. 


7.  O  Fire,  may  we  possess  in  thy  guard  that  high 
desire, — possess,  O  Lord  of  the  treasures,  that  Treasure 
and  its  heroes,  possess  replenishing  thee  thy  plenitude, 
possess,  O  ageless  Fire,  Thy  ageless  light. 


Sukta  6 

1.  Man  turns  with  a  new  sacrifice  to  the  Son  of  Force 
when  he  desires  the  Way  and  the  guard.  He  arrives 
in  his  journeyings  to  the  heavenly  priest  of  the  call,  the 
priest  shining  with  light,  but  black  is  His  march  through 
the  forests  he  tears. 

« 

2.  He  grows  white  and  thunderous,  he  stands  in  a 
luminous  world;  he  is  most  young  with  his  imperishable 
clamouring  fires.  This  is  he  that  makes  pure  and  is  full 
of  his  multitudes  and,  even  as  he  devours,  goes  after 
the  things  that  are  many,  the  things  that  are  wide. 


335 


itju  athhia  tife  uamhifaifete  fcjfeji±teifeii±  fejte 
I  lie  w>k->Mbtb  ihafe^h  XXJXte  Xfe^j  tlteJtt 


6\  £&t 


||G\II  feife:  P*$E>  fe£  feifi: 

I  klb|hfe  kPkPj  fetXfefeJ.  ^hP*hfeteJ  fefej  fete}  te 


ll^ll  fete  fej  y3fefe±feafefe  Xfefe*  lfete  felfeifelfe  te. 

I  b*PP  IPbh  K4MP^k  PjlbK^  Pjlfcbjlh  Ifefefett  JJK 


nVill  feJJfefe  XXfefe  iB^kfefeibiii^itt  rfejtejki  fefeiXte 
l  iPit^P  tfejtelfe  XfefefeXfe  ynafe  JS  jyXJXhlh  i^tej  fete 


llxll  :fefeL  feife  fejte  !P>kbPlb  fejlit  fej  lfefej£  Rhft  fete 
I  :i£iJte  ifeltebJfeX  feijhfe  Xte  :j±afepk  :fefete  :aifete  XX  fe 


llfell  :fe±teii  lfefefe  P-jPfe  lfefe  ltetfete  Ltefe]  miteJTifeji 
I  ^la  tPIklk  kite  xpip^piferfe-lfej  fe  fej 


3>IIi  OIXSAJV  3  Hi  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


3.  O  Fire,  thy  lights  range  wind-impelled  on  every 
side,  pure  as  thou  art  pure.  Many  things  they  violate 
and  break  in  their  rashness  and  enjoy  the  forests  of  their 
pleasure,  heavenly  lights,  seers  of  the  ninefold-ray. 

4.  O  Fire  of  the  burning  purities,  pure  and  flaming- 
bright  are  these  thy  horses  that  loosed  to  the  gallop  raze 
the  earth.  Then  wide  is  thy  wandering  and  its  light  shines 
far  as  it  drives  them  up  to  the  dappled  Mother’s  heights. 

5.  Then  the  tongue  of  the  Bull  leaps  constantly  like  the 
thunderbolt  loosed  of  the  God  who  fights  for  the  herds  of 
the  Light.  The  destruction  of  Fire  is  like  the  charge  of  a 
hero;  he  is  terrible  and  irresistible,  he  hews  the  forests 
asunder. 

6.  Thou  hast  spread  out  the  earthly  speed-ranges  by 
thy  light  and  the  violence  of  thy  mighty  scourge.  Repel  by 
thy  forceful  powers  all  dangerous  things;  turn  to  conquer 
those  who  would  conquer  us,  shatter  our  confronters. 

7.  O  rich  in  thy  brilliances,  Fire  with  thy  manifold 
luminous  mights,  rivet  to  us  the  rich  and  various  treasure, 
most  richly  diverse,  that  awakens  us  to  knowledge  and 
founds  our  expanding  growth.  O  delightful  God,  to  him 
who  voices  thee  with  delightful  words  the  vast  delightful 
wealth  and  its  many  hero-keepers! 


Sukta  7 

1.  Head  of  heaven  and  traveller  of  the  earth  a  universal 
Power  was  born  to  us  in  the  Truth,  a  Guest  of  men,  a  seer 
and  absolute  King;  the  Gods  brought  to  birth  universal 
Fire  and  made  him  in  the  mouth  a  vessel  of  the  oblation. 


337 


II6MI  MkklS  lh|J>  Jksiskkh  tjlkkk  JkSkj  Ik  ijh 

I  :kJ4>  IM^>  JkkJ  kj  mhHJfr-Mki.  Jk  fej 


ll^tl  :i&k)  Mali  :Ikk  k£  ikk  jykk  kjlkkk  IkSkj  Ikik 
I  lp£<fe  h^Phfr  lt£J  t'JMP  IkiSk  ^jlPhJI»J 


UY,||  ki^PoPhP  k%  :k.Pj<k->hi>|khj  :MhMfr*h 
I  kfei>  Uksjk  kjlkk  kjlk  kk  ikiklk 


I  IK.  II  ^lkilkhijk  XklkSkikihkikklkJkk  kk 
I  p^k  k  kjk  lk^  k  kiy  klkkrn  kkk  %£iy  lki 


llfell  kjlkllkihikkli  kj&k  £jk  filk->hpa  >Hfc.&p 
I  :£ihPjmhjfe  liiiiijki  ^hm  ^Jki 


Hill  :ik£  kikkk  k%  kikk  IklXtokfciX  iklk£k 
I  p^p  k  kjkklkkllk  iloULi.  kkk  Iklkk  Jtyik 


a'HIJ  OIXSAH  3HX  OX  SNIAIAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


2.  All  they  together  came  to  him,  a  navel  knot  of  sacri¬ 
fice,  a  house  of  riches,  a  mighty  point  of  call  in  the  battle. 
Charioteer  of  the  Works  of  the  way,  eye  of  intuition  of  the 
sacrifice,  the  Gods  brought  to  birth  the  universal  Godhead. 

3.  O  Fire,  from  thee  is  born  the  Seer,  the  Horse  and  of 
thee  are  the  Heroes  whose  might  overcomes  the  adversary. 
O  King,  O  universal  Power,  found  in  us  the  desirable 
treasures. 

4.  O  Immortal,  all  the  Gods  come  together  to  thee  in 
thy  birth  as  to  a  new-born  child.  O  universal  Power,  they 
travelled  to  immortality  by  the  works  of  thy  will  when 
thou  leapedst  alight  from  the  Father  and  Mother. 

5.  O  Fire,  universal  Godhead,  none  could  do  violence  to 
the  laws  of  thy  mighty  workings  because  even  in  thy  birth 
in  the  lap  of  the  Father  and  the  Mother  thou  hast  dis¬ 
covered  the  light  of  intuition  of  the  Days  in  manifested 
tilings.1 

6.  The  heights  of  heaven  were  measured  into  form  by 
the  eye  of  this  universal  Force,  they  were  shaped  by  the 
intuition  of  the  Immortal.  All  the  worlds  are  upon  his 
head;  the  seven  far-flowing  rivers  climbed  from  him  like 
branches. 

7.  The  Universal  mighty  of  will  measured  into  form 
the  kingdom  of  middle  space;  a  Seer,  he  shaped  the 
luminous  planes  of  Heaven.  He  has  spread  around  us  all 
these  worlds;  he  is  the  guardian  of  immortality  and  its 
indomitable  defender. 


1  or,  in  all  sorts  of  knowledge. 


339 


||V)tl  b  PPJb  bXb  HJ  ib.{P  bh»h 

1  $Jh  mtb  M>  Pi^h.'g-lnb  b*bbj  bbbb 


H;UI  :Mfellh  ibfeijum  >bibtb  jPb^b3j>bhP>j*>  ns 
I  khhjfefeiP  hhhlfr.lX  UiXj  nioAltte  ua^Jit  feihkhis 


Ufellkbnafe  X&hfe£)?J  l>P.lfe£.fhPfete  iatUaj  feM£  fej 

|  :hn  lbbJ|bfJ'^f.<£fab^bD^|p1Vbtg  |kbj  ^b|Slb*.P-»bo 


llfcll  j?Kh4h«felb  iX^Jk  \>PibtbS<fcS  P|HhjhtVt»>jP^ 

i  msiie  HinEX>jrHPP  lynjte  nix  :nntM^  n 


Hill  bP>>frlfr  Pi2b  Xi  Wk  :fejjk  ]Pb?PPjk  k]Xb].fe&fe 
I  :t»-sbPin>  lJaXfej  XIX  b  JS  :M  k  tetikte  IkAh  XittJb 

?  km 


a-HIJ  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


SUKTA  8 

1.  Now  have  I  spoken  aloud  the  force  of  the  brilliant 
Male  who  fills  the  world,  the  discoveries  of  knowledge  of 
the  god  who  knows  all  things  that  are.  A  new  and  pure 
and  beautiful  thought  is  streaming  like  sacramental  wine 
to  Fire,  the  universal  Godhead. 

2.  Fire  is  the  guardian  of  the  laws  of  all  workings  and 
he  kept  safe  the  laws  of  his  action  and  motion  even  in  the 
moment  of  his  birth  in  the  supreme  ether.  The  Universal 
mighty  of  will  measured  into  shape  the  middle  world  and 
touched  heaven  with  his  greatness. 

3.  The  Wonderful,  the  Friend  propped  up  earth  and 
heaven  and  made  the  darkness  a  disappearing  thing  by  the 
Light.  He  rolled  out  the  two  minds  like  skins;  the 
Universal  assumed  every  masculine  might. 

4.  The  Great  Ones  seized  him  in  the  lap  of  the  waters 
and  the  Peoples  came  to  the  King  with  whom  is  the  illu¬ 
mining  Word.  Messenger  of  the  luminous  Sun,  Life  that 
expands  in  the  Mother  brought  Fire  the  universal 
Godhead  from  the  supreme  Beyond. 

5.  Found  for  those  who  from  age  to  age  speak  the  word 
that  is  new,  the  word  that  is  a  discovery  of  knowledge,  O 
Fire,  their  glorious  treasure;  but  cut  him  in  twain  who  is 
a  voice  of  evil,  cast  him  low  by  thy  force  of  light  like  a 
tree  with  the  thunderbolt,  imperishable1  king. 


1  or,  ageless 


341 


ufciiaaah  Hbdis  xhiit  *aakaa%a^  |  a 

i  pjifjfe  ih-ghM^tp  a  lamina  aj  a  a±al  a 


niu  j>'bj  iniaaiiaa  uh  ajiaiaa  it  a£  aaaj  a±a 
i  xajaasxaa  a^jaa  a  a  piaaaia  ai  a  a±a  ka 


m ^ ii  aju±aa^iJLaa^u?^.>aj]a.iaa  a  ;aiaaia  (>Hasa 
i  :aju&%  ^aift>  aaa  aj  a  pk>$air.q&  aak? 


V.  !fiB 


iismi  :aiaaa  :jiia  a  a  aae  ysa  iala  (t  a  ua 

i  aua  aaaaaj  ijia  ftiaasgaxjajih^t  aaiajasaa 


ii^ii  :ajajjaa  aataxa  >.ajai?a  aayia  aaja  aaa  aa 
i  aa^aS  x&aaft  ajiasiaxia  Ikaaa  aatMaae 


3XIX  OliSAPV  3HA  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  SIX 

6.  O  Fire,  uphold  in  our  masters  of  the  treasure  their 
indestructible1  hero-force  and  unbending  might  of  battle. 
O  universal  Fire,  may  we  by  thy  safe  keepings  conquer 
the  plenitude  of  the  hundreds  and  the  plenitude  of  the 
thousands. 

7.  O  our  impeller,2  holder  of  the  triple  session,  shield 
our  luminous  seers  with  thy  indomitable  guardian  fires. 
Keep  safe,  O  Fire,  the  army  of  those  who  have  given,  O 
Universal,  hearing  our  hymn  to  thee  deliver  to  its  forward 
march. 


Sukta  9 

1 .  A  day  that  is  black  and  a  day  that  is  argent  bright, 
two  worlds  revolve  in  their  different  paths  by  forces  that 
we  must  know.  Fire,  the  universal  Godhead,  like  a  king 
that  comes  to  birth  has  thrust  the  Darknesses  down  by  the 
Light. 

2.  I  know  not  the  woof,  I  know  not  the  warp,  nor  what 
is  this  web  that  they  weave  moving  to  and  fro  in  the  field 
of  their  motion  and  labour.  There  are  secrets  that  must 
be  told  and  of  someone  the  son  speaks  them  here,  one 
highest  beyond  through  his  father  lower  than  he. 

3.  He  knows  the  warp,  he  knows  the  woof,  he  tells  in 
their  time  the  things  that  must  be  spoken.  This  is  the 
guardian  of  immortality  who  wakes  to  the  knowledge  of 
these  things;  walking  here  below  he  is  one  highest  beyond 
who  sees  through  another. 


1  or,  imaging 

2  or,  O  doer  of  sacrifice, 


343 


II ^ II  :l.^Plfr  iijisfe  limm  IMkiy  ik  Kj  k  :fcjm=£  iS 

I  bmbji  >|--mk>p  ]£k  PjhK  PiyKfc  kakj  k±h  ife  u£ 


o*  m 


ne\n  :k  mk&ksimiisik  kkkkS|>HIP<?fr 
I  km^ajk  HJiik  p>mfcP->lklhkytr>HPK>  iki  %ikj 


ll^ll  teikjia  k  ksy  Mlt^Sikk  k>|  umieil  ppta-tkk  h  jy 
I  kj  j^JUe  m>  kyjm  iym&ii  fej  <PI?Ph  4I0U2  ij  iy 


iiv>u  Km  pyx  ly  kjhfa-  'Jeh  Ikik  :pppp  :ikk  ££iy 
l  :P^^kPh  aaiyi*  urn  'k  ikik  P^jPjPjm^  itk 


iixii  :kiiitefe  imkkmmmmy  lie  ms  ms  ii  me 
i  Kmh  kktyyss  :j±t>n  uy£  me 


a^IIJ  OIASAW  HHA  OX  SN1VAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


4.  This  is  the  pristine  priest  of  the  call,  behold  him! 
this  is  the  immortal  Light  in  mortals.  This  is  he  that  is 
born  and  grows  with  a  body  and  is  the  Immortal  seated 
and  steadfast  for  ever. 

5.  An  immortal  Light  set  inward  for  seeing,  a  swiftest 
mind  within  in  men  that  walk  on  the  way.  All  the  Gods 
with  a  single  mind,  a  common  intuition,  move  aright  in 
their  divergent  paths  towards  the  one  Will. 

6.  My  ears  range  wide  to  hear  and  wide  my  eyes  to 
see,  wide  this  Light  that  is  set  in  the  heart;  wide  walks 
my  mind  and  I  set  my  thought  afar;  something  there  is 
that  I  shall  speak;  something  that  now  I  shall  think. 

7.  All  the  gods  were  in  awe  of  thee  when  thou  stoodest 
in  the  darkness  and  bowed  down  before  thee,  O  Fire. 
May  the  Universal  Godhead  keep  us  that  we  may  be  safe, 
may  the  Immortal  keep  us  that  we  may  be  safe. 


Sukta  10 

1 .  When  the  pilgrim-rite  moves  on  its  way,  set  in  your 
front  the  divine  ecstatic  Fire,  place  him  in  front  by  your 
words,  the  Flame  of  the  good  riddance:1  he  is  the  Knower 
of  all  things  born ;  his  light  shines  wide  and  he  shall  make 
easy  for  us  the  progressions  of  the  sacrifice. 


1  The  word  suvrkti  corresponds  to  the  Katharsis  of  the  Greek  mystics 
— the  clearance,  riddance  or  rejection  of  all  perilous  and  impure  stuff  from 
the  consciousness.  It  is  Agni  Pavaka,  the  purifying  Fire  who  brings  to  us 
this  riddance  or  purification,  “suvrikti”. 


345 


IlMl  yaH  tiijji  bMUiH 

I  UlhabjS  ^  |2  Wfr  itlte  lti  Uife:  £12  1±£ 


I  I'M  i  luiutf-  p-»jp  HJlfe£H}i?4telk±ltel£lfe  IBJeJss  IBJsli  b 
I  b-tfr^bbh  bji  fcite  ^tejitMb^S  t£SJli  b 


llxn  :«fetlh  £i£  liU&jm  :>P*]U2jtaffi  k£fej  ih  Me 
l  it>?.iif.a<a  mu*  m?l^S  yiH  HttmK  ijsh  :h  lie 


IlfeKPJihS  JLbiti 

(  :jal?£  isbj  ifcibb  bkiie  Jb  fon  labJss  it  bihjh 


Hill  ^ibh  :bHi±  Jfcjik  bbi±tt  tiiiib  liJJii 

I  :biiii  Jaktkjii^le  p>>pi£  :hk  HH 


SHU  OIXSAiV  3HJ.  OJ.  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


2.  O  Fire,  kindled  by  man’s  fires,  priest  of  the  call  who 
comest  with  thy  light,  priest  of  the  many  flame-armies, 
hearken  to  the  anthem  our  thoughts  strain  out  pure  to  the 
godhead  like  pure  clarified  butter,1  even  as  Mamata 
chanted  to  him  her  paeon. 

3.  He  among  mortals  is  fed  on  inspiration,  the  illumined 
who  gives  with  his  word  to  the  Fire,  the  seer  whom  the 
Fire  of  the  brilliant  illuminations,  settles  by  his  luminous 
safeguardings  in  the  conquest  of  the  Pen  where  are  the 
herds  of  the  Light. 

4.  Fire  of  the  blackened  trail  in  his  very  birth  has  filled 
wide  earth  and  heaven  with  his  far-seeing  light.  Now  has 
Fire  that  makes  pure  been  seen  by  his  bright  flame  even 
through  much  darkness  of  the  billowing  Night. 

5.  Found,  O  Fire,  for  us  and  the  masters  of  plenty  by 
thy  safeguardings  packed  with  the  plenitudes  a  treasure 
of  richly  brilliant  kinds;  for  these  are  they  who  surpass  all 
others  in  their  opulence  and  inspiration  and  hero-mights. 

6.  O  Fire,  yearn  to  the  sacrifice  that  the  bringer  of  the 
offering  casts  to  thee;  found  the  rapture.  Hold  firm  in  the 
Bharadwajas  the  perfect  purification;  guard  them  in  their 
seizing  of  the  riches  of  the  quest. 

7.  Scatter  all  hostile  things,  increase  the  revealing 
Word.  May  we  revel  in  the  rapture,  strong  with  strength 
of  the  Heroes,  living  a  hundred  winters. 


1  Here  we  have  the  due  to  the  symbol  of  the  “clarified  butter”  in  the 
sacrifice;  like  the  others  it  is  used  in  its  double  meaning,  “clarified  butter” 
or,  as  we  may  say,  “the  light-offering”. 


347 


UV,||  :feb=  i±  JQ&  bjllsle  ibafejL  bbb  feb  labile 

I  tPfeJbfc  |PbPft>K-  Hjll?blP>>$jE>  IBhfth  1  b£b 


llxll  MkU»  Itch  PhKfi  bijlbble  ll-K>$PI>  IttHb  b  b  blK 

1  Ifa-itP-  PtClMH.bj 


llfell  \&1  bjbfc  JbiSa  bb  IJSbJ  Sb  pibM-Jle  p^hjb 
I  hcU'h  bJnb  is  2ajb  llabbj  pi  Spy  lbib 


Uh.ll  pip-*  bb  bib  P>om>£jt>  »SIt'  l h&blh 

l  fayh  lbbbj  IbibibiSie  pi  ptbSifct  ibp-  bi 


II :ibibb  JbbJh  bibpk  lblJS  IbibJLb  ilnkbibjy  pb  lie 
I  PfeJ^K  t  ip^h  ,\blb  PfPi^pt'H  (PbJ>JP^p  bibb 


n  *£& 


a'au  oij.saw  3Hi  01  snj-vah 


MANDALA  SIX 


SUKTA  11 

1.  Missioned  and  strong  to  sacrifice,  offer  the  sacrifice, 
Priest  of  the  call;  O  Fire,  put  away  from  us  as  if  by  the 
applied  force  of  the  Life-gods  all  that  opposes.  Turn  in 
their  paths  towards  our  offering  Mitra  and  Varuna  and 
the  twin  Lords  of  the  journey  and  Earth  and  Heaven. 

2.  To  us  thou  art  our  priest  of  the  invocation,  harmless 
and  perfect  in  ecstasy;  thou  art  the  god  within  in  mortals 
that  makes  the  discoveries  of  knowledge;  thou  art  the 
carrier  with  the  burning  mouth,  with  the  purifying 
flame  of  oblation.  O  Fire,  worship  with  sacrifice  thy  own 
body. 

3.  In  thee  the  understanding  is  full  of  riches  and  it 
desires  the  gods,  the  divine  births,  that  the  word  may 
be  spoken  and  the  sacrifice  done,  when  the  singer,  the 
sage,  wisest  of  the  Angiras  chants  his  honey-rhythm  in 
the  rite. 

4.  He  has  leaped  into  radiance  and  is  wise  of  heart 
and  wide  of  light;  O  Fire,  sacrifice  to  the  largeness  of 
Earth  and.  Heaven.  All  the  five  peoples  lavish  the  obla¬ 
tion  with  obeisance  of  surrender  and  anoint  as  the  living 
being,  Fire  the  bringer  of  their  satisfactions. 

5.  When  the  sacred  grass  has  been  plucked  with 
prostration  of  surrender  to  the  Fire,  when  the  ladle  of 
the  purification  full  of  the  light-offering  has  been  set  to 
its  labour,  when  the  home  has  been  reached  in  the  house 
of  Earth  and  the  sacrifice  lodged  like  an  eye  in  the  sun, — 


a25 


349 


11*11  :m2  lyi&ill*  Lfeisfe  kkik  mi 

I  ue  H£  %£a  :j±yifej£  k 


nfeu  kysuye  mjiifc  irnys  k  yyiae 

i  kyaie  y±miik  j&kae  yxyi  pupfeppiftih  isatsjy 


uhn  toiLb  uakh  fcjmH  ikm  k  y^pp^phi-j 

I  ;y^  h  P^iPPP^PigPiP  kkh  «feihP^  ^ik^h  lie 


n ^ n  pipp  ijamjm  k  mMil  imp-**  hM  :t&  h  me 

i  taM2  yii>4>.  irtfi(P>py^i>  miij£  mixl  lPil  y?.n 


U  mt 


Hill  -.'ilk  tmi  hk&  pjie  iPlftMfe  m^it  :X1X 
I  :HJ3iytJktJl£  btiltjyiink  :k  U2il££ 


ami  DIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


6.  O  Son  of  Force,  O  Fire,  kindling  with  the  gods  thy 
fires,  Priest  of  the  call,  priest  with  thy  many  flame-armies, 
dispense  to  us  the  Treasures;  shining  with  light  let  us 
charge  beyond  the  sin  and  the  struggle. 


Sukta  12 

1.  In  the  midmost  of  the  gated  house  Fire,  the  Priest 
of  the  call,  the  King  of  the  sacred  seat  and  the  whip  of 
swiftness,  to  sacrifice  to  Earth  and  Heaven!  This  is  the 
Son  of  Force  in  whom  is  the  Truth;  he  stretches  out  from 
afar  with  his  light  like  the  sun. 

2.  When  a  man  sacrifices  in  thee,  O  King,  O  Lord 
of  sacrifice,  when  he  does  well  his  works  in  the  wise  and 
understanding  Fire  like  Heaven  in  its  all-forming  labour, 
triple  thy  session ;  thy  speed  is  as  if  of  a  deliverer,  when 
thou  comest  to  give  the  sacrifice  whose  offerings  are 
man’s  human  fullnesses. 

3.  A  splendour  in  the  forest,  most  brilliant-forceful  is 
the  speed  of  his  journeying;  he  is  like  a  whip  on  the  path 
and  ever  he  grows  and  blazes.  He  is  like  a  smelter  who 
does  hurt  to  none;  he  is  the  Immortal  who  wakes  of 
himself  to  knowledge:  he  cannot  be  turned  from  his 
way  mid  the  growths  of  the  earth. 

4.  Fire,  the  knower  of  all  things  born,  is  hymned  by 
our  paeans  in  the  house  as  if  in  one  that  walks  on  the 
way.  He  feeds  on  the  Tree  and  conquers  by  our  will 
like  a  war-horse;  this  shining  Bull  is  adored  by  us  with 
sacrifice  like  a  father. 


351 


Ilfclt  JaJJkSj  Ihlkak  my*k  lkll  kULkjfe  k%K  hi  h 
I  hMh  kjittoh  JEJ  yskj  kjtkkk  k±jl  lktefc  :kjhlk  k 


llfell  :^tt  kk  lkJk  HjsiMk3fc  klk  k  Ikkj  kke 

I  HJUte  k(l£ijh  kkjkil  IK  k  Ukt  hi 


it hihviiji)  ^^U£3jk  ykk}  toSki  y*ikkjl  yeaJa 
I  :ifcfe  k  \kkjh  k±Jk  kj  kikilikqk  lthS  ikkgjki 


u  m. 


nVU  UiikS  :ih%k!5  kkk  lk^.1  k]lk  fcj  ikii  kj% 
I  :kiteijkjktjte  kiikJkSk}  iklkkJkK  Ik  k>  k 


I|V)||  2ii  ifr-»h  Pj>>?m  k  ynklkjkk  IHkJkJ  J5±ik  :k  yak 
I  k\kah  pjiht»»B>Uh  lbk  Jkik  kijkkb  k±lki  kk 


a^IIJ  OHS  AIM  HHA  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


5.  And  now  his  splendours  chant  aloud  and  he  hews 
with  ease  and  walks  along  the  wideness  of  the  earth.  He 
is  rapid  in  his  race  and  in  a  moment  is  loosed  speeding 
to  the  gallop:  he  is  like  a  thief  that  runs;  his  light  is 
seen  beyond  the  desert  places. 

6.  O  War-horse,  us  from  the  bondage  deliver,  kindling, 
O  Fire,  with  all  thy  fires;  for  thou  travellest  to  the  Riches 
and  scatterest  the  forces  of  affliction  and  sorrow.  May 
we  revel  in  the  rapture,  strong  with  the  strength  of  the 
Heroes,  living  a  hundred  winters. 


Sukta  13 

1.  O  felicitous  Fire,  of  thee  are  all  felicities  and  they 
grow  wide  from  thee  like  branches  from  a  tree.  For 
quickly  come,  in  the  piercing  of  the  Python  adversary, 
the  Riches  and  the  desirable  plenty  and  the  Rain  of 
Heaven  and  the  flowing  of  the  Waters. 

2.  Thou  art  Bhaga  of  the  felicities  and  thou  pourest 
on  us  the  ecstasy  and  takest  up  thy  house  in  us,  a  per¬ 
vading  presence  and  a  potent  splendour.  O  divine  Fire, 
like  Mitra  thou  art  a  feeder  on  the  vast  Truth  and  the 
much  joy  and  beauty. 

3.  O  Fire  born  of  the  Truth,  O  thinker  and  knower, 
when  consenting  with  the  Child  of  the  Waters  thou 
takest  pleasure  in  a  man  and  speedest  him  with  the 
Treasure,  he  becomes  a  master  over  beings  and  in  his 
might  slays  the  Python  adversary  and  becomes  a  seer 
and  carries  out  with  him  the  riches  of  the  Dweller  in  the 
Cave. 


353 


life II  bbbie  Jbb&yi  :bb  JbbJbbib 

I  :bie  (M>  £*tehi  Instill  iblb 


Hill  :bbj  Jbbb  bbb  £2.yiiJbjS  b^K 
I  :bj3fe  fabibbbijle  lb%JS  Sjijb^ie 


II ^  II  ^I»IP\>^  b£  b»£  b  h  kbit 

I  :bjbjjb  blbk  bbj  ^  {bib  Jb  lbbe 

a*  a £e 


ll^ll  :]b£jbb  bbb  bbbbjE  bJibJJbbJlbSbJ 

:]b  Jb  bjlb  bbb  £Jb  bbe  lbl£bj  Jb  Jblb  *b£  bib 


ll^n  bl£is  bilbJib  Jbb  |bih  ijb  lBi£ab  bjjlt& 
I  :lb  £ba£  :b£b  Jbfe  biSliJbS  IBbfcJB  be  bib  ib 


llxll  :bsBb  ^bih  biib  bb  bibiib  bjb  b£  b  bib} 
I  vblfefe  bjbjbj  ibbbbbbkhjyi  JB^Bs  Jb&  bib 


ablJ  DIXSAiM  3H1  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


4.  O  Son  of  Force,  the  mortal  who  has  reached  to  the 
intensity  of  thee  by  the  word  and  the  utterance  and  the 
altar  and  the  sacrifice,  draws  to  him  sufficiency  of  every 
kind  of  wealth,  O  divine  Fire,  and  walks  on  the  way  with 
his  riches.  . 

5.  O  Fire,  O  Son  of  Force,  found  for  men  that  they 
may  grow,  happy  riches  of  inspiration  with  strength  of 
its  hero-keepers, — many  herds,  thy  creation  in  thy  might, 
but  now  a  food  for  the  wolf  and  the  foe  and  the  destroyer. 

6.  O  Son  of  Force,  become  the  vast  speaker  within 
us;  give  us  the  Son  of  our  begetting,  give  us  all  that  is 
packed  with  the  plenitudes;  let  me  enjoy  by  my  every 
word  satisfaction  of  fullness.  May  we  revel  in  the  rapture, 
strong  with  the  strength  of  the  Heroes,  living  a  hundred 
winters. 


Sukta  14 

1.  When  mortal  man  by  his  musings  comes  to  take 
pleasure  of  work  and  thought  in  the  Fire,  he  shines  with 
light  and  is  one  supreme;  he  receives  the  impulsion  that 
leads  him  to  safety. 

2.  The  Fire  is  the  thinker  and  knower,  the  Fire  is  a 
mightiest  disposer  of  works  and  a  seer.  To  Fire  the  priest 
of  the  invocation  the  peoples  of  men  aspire  in  their 
sacrifices. 

3.  Of  many  kinds  are  they  who  seek  thy  safeguard 
and  strive  with  the  Fire  for  his  riches;  men  breaking 
through  the  Destroyer  seek  to  overcome  his  lawless 
strength  by  the  order  of  their  works. 


355 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


SlftTWHTcftT?  eft?  TTlfft  I 

TFT  TFrfftl  5TTT:  5TTTI  fW  11*11 


3Tftrff  f%?RT  ftrrt  TRHTO>TfcT  I 
HfTTI  TFTTTcft  Tfaeff^Tci:  IlMI 


3T?I5T  ft*  ftlTT^ft  ^TTTrft  Tfa:  §T?ft  ftTHft:  I 
Ttr^  FTfFcT  gfefft  f?Tt  TT  fgeft  3Tfrfft  ffTeTT  % 

eTT  fRRHT  II^U 


m  ^ 


IHFR  T  Tt  3lfftfTRTTft  fT^TlFft  fT5Tt  ftm  I 

^  C\  O  >9  O  c 

3RTT  Tf?TTI  Slfasqfo  T’ftf  TT^TTR  ll?H 


fftft  T  ft  gftlft  TTTt  Icft^TR^fTfTTR  I 

h  cT  gsftaft  Tftr^  3rtt  srarftTfaft^rft  feftfeft  irii 


356 


MANDALA  SIX 


4.  The  Fire  gives  to  man  a  Master  of  beings,  a  Warrior 
who  overbears  the  charge  of  the  foe  and  wins  the  Waters; 
the  enemies  are  afraid  at  his  very  sight  and  scatter  in 
panic  from  his  puissance. 

5.  The  Fire  is  the  godhead  who  rescues  mortal  man 
by  knowledge  from  the  Binder.  A  forceful  thing  is  the 
treasure  of  his  riches,  unencircled  by  the  adversary, 
unbesieged  in  its  plenitudes. 

6.  O  Fire,  O  friendly  Light,  O  Godhead  turn  to  the 
Godheads,  mayest  thou  speak  for  us  the  true  thought  of 
Earth  and  Heaven;  march  in  peace  to  the  happy  abode 
and  the  Men  of  Heaven.  Let  us  pass  safe  beyond  the 
foe  and  the  sin  and  the  stumbling. 

Let  us  pass  beyond  these  things,  pass  in  thy  keeping 
through  them  safe. 


V 


SUKTA  15 

L  Thou  must  crown  with  the  word  the  guest  who 
wakes  from  sleep  with  the  dawn,  Master  of  all  these 
peoples.  He  is  pure  from  his  very  birth  and  surely  he 
comes  to  us  from  heaven  in  his  time;  long  too,  a  child 
from  the  womb,  he  feeds  on  all  that  is  unfallen. 

2.  The  Bhrigus  set  in  the  Tree  the  godhead  of  our 
aspiration  with  his  high  flame  of  light  like  a  friend  well- 
confirmed  in  his  place.  And  now,  O  Wonderful,  well- 
pleased  in  him  who  has  cast  to  thee  the  offering,  thou 
art  magnified  by  wordings  of  thy  power  from  day  to  day. 


357 


U6\ii  kt^pin'  kpt>  pyh>i&t£  imp*  pkj 

I  hkK  ^>0  uk  <*»blh  kp£  kit  likj  ikkjk 


n^n  :kl  *k  pkk  k%k  ^ 

hib  £j  kkfe  kkk  PPibbj  kklfcpit  ik  hk 

I  lftjh|jf.u  bjkjle  Ik  fclgfcisj  kfcikl  IbkJH  :k  kpkkpl® 


MVtU  :ij£ie  ynljakk  k  kk  \h  UE  lai  k  IrHtPftHIh  iXfek 
I  ikklk  k  Itthfr  kkkklJ*  lh&  lkkkkkSJk  tfrfrklh 


llxll  kiksltkk  pp^ibb^kjPbjbfi  kkkteE  k  kkj 
I  kikiki  :kkk  iikll  ktlkilokk  fcjkjie  Jk  klkk 


llfcll  :ttm  MteXSlk 

ibi<p  hi  fra^Pi ja  fia-hfeie  lkakik  |k£k  Jk£  :kii 
I  :kkk  b-»>WPib»>h  :blfc  Jkk  pfeklkkSk  pi  k 


3 -an  OliSAIAI  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


3.  Be  in  us  the  one  whom  the  wolf  cannot  rend,  the 
god  who  makes  grow  the  discernment,  makes  grow  the 
supreme  inner  Warrior  who  delivers.1  O  Son  of  Force, 
extend  in  mortals  the  Riches,  the  wide-spreading  House, 
for  the  caster  of  the  offering,  for  Bharadwaja  the  wide- 
spreading  House. 

4.  Crown  must  thou  the  guest  shining  with  light,  the 
Male  of  the  Sun-world,  the  priest  of  man’s  invocation 
who  makes  perfect  the  Rite  of  the  Path.  Crown  with 
your  acts  of  purification  the  Seer  whose  speech  has  its 
home  in  the  Light,2  the  Carrier  of  offerings,  the  Traveller, 
the  Godhead  of  Fire. 

5.  He  shines  with  the  light  that  makes  pure,  the  light 
that  awakens  to  knowledge,  shines  in  beauty  on  the  earth 
as  if  with  a  splendour  of  Dawn.  Fie  is  as  if  one  hewing  his 
way  in  the  march  and  battle  of  the  shining  Horse;  he  is 
like  one  athirst  and  luminously  blazing,  the  ageless  Fire. 

6.  Fire  and  again  Fire  set  to  work  with  your  fuel, 
chant  with  your  speech  the  dear,  the  beloved  Guest. 
Approach  and  set  the  Immortal  alight  with  your  words; 
a  god  he  enjoys  in  the  gods  our  desirable  things, — a 
god,  he  enjoys  our  works  in  the  gods. 

7.  I  chant  the  Fire  that  is  kindled  with  the  word  for 
fuel,  the  Fire  that  is  pure  and  makes  pure;  Fire  that  is 
steadfast  for  ever  and  marches  in  front  in  the  Rite  of  the 
Path.  We  desire  with  his  felicities  the  Illumined,  the 
priest  of  the  call,  the  harmless,  rich  with  many  blessings, 
the  Seer  who  knows  all  births  that  are. 


1  or,  be  our  deliverer  from  the  enemy  beyond  and  within  us. 

2  or,  has  its  home  in  the  Heaven,  or,  houses  the  Light, 


359 


09S 


llUlt  mla  :t2ltihi  :tji  .a  :tlh  £a.-tM=»aita  iti  a 

|  bliabKblpSp  :fc  feb}  $jlh  HJ  (PhoPb.  P>Hb> 


nUiiiMi  p(Pbiii,  it  tjtjjt  lyajtj  It  titt 

I  l*PJ|b  iiS  ttife  2tlle  tit  hjhhj  t  Pbilh  tltt 


II o  ^  II  Pb-(b  hPP>P>jkhs£  IS  tiltj  PjlP.frt  ItiSp^t  a 

i  a^a  ^aiitjafesti  |t&S  jtyasfe  a 


n’bii  ta  yasj  :t^tfeijt  mi  ts|ayntaayaa  t^t  at 
i  jgtjaa  |pp>>  jpib^  tit  aa  mat  aamatj 


ii7U  tj  iphp  p]htbj  aaj  tjaia  tsa^aa  t-witj; 

i  atajatia  itja  iiata£  atta  taa  ta±tl  aa 


3  >113  OIXSAtV  3HX  OX  S.MWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


8.  O  Fire,  they  have  set  thee  here  the  Messenger,  the 
Immortal  in  generation  after  generation,  the  Carrier  of 
offerings,  protector  of  man  and  the  Godhead  of  his 
prayer.  Gods  alike  and  mortals  sit  with  obeisance  before 
the  all-pervading  Master  of  the  peoples,  the  ever-wakeful 
Fire. 

9.  O  Fire,  according  to  the  laws  of  thy  works  thou 
pervadest  either  race;  thou  art  the  messenger  of  the 
Gods  and  rangest  both  the  worlds.  Since  we  have  ac¬ 
cepted  thy  thinking  and  the  right  understanding  that  is 
thine,  be  to  us  our  triple  armour  of  defence  and  benignant 
helper. 

10.  May  we  who  know  not  come  into  touch  with  this 
great  knower  with  his  true  front  and  just  walk  and  perfect 
vision.  May  he  who  knows  all  manifested  things1  do 
sacrifice  for  us,  may  Fire  voice  our  offering  in  the  world 
of  the  Immortals. 

11.0  heroic  Fire,  thou  guardest  and  bringest  safe  to 
the  other  side  the  man  who  has  reached  to  the  Thought 
for  thee  the  Seer  and  achieved  the  intensity  of  the  sacrifice 
or  its  ascending  movement;  thou  fillest  him  with  might 
and  riches. 

i 

12.  O  Fire  that  hast  the  Force,  guard  us  from  fault, 
guard  from  one  who  would  subject  us.  May  there  come 
to  thee  along  the  path  full  of  destructions  the  thousand¬ 
fold  delectable  treasure. 


1  or,  all  kinds  of  knowledge 


361 


69S 


ne\i it  :ptXP=iPS  >HK-PhlPP^pVsPP 
I  :PP%  P^feiP  PrppPfr.hPI  PP£ 


II^IIPIP  MPiPMNh  pp  pp  piyp  P^PPft  bbjuai 
I  PPJ>b  fr|P  :pfeis  frteJln&b%  P^PPi  tpJ^iPJ 


llV^n  PIP  1PP1PP  PXP  IP 

P>P  IPVJ?  PJifcfrfrJ  PjtPlPlPPJPiPPP  Ik  1PP 
l  w^p  yibt>.  PlPP  lip  PJ  ypi  ij  PjlPPjS  PJjPK  PJP 


iixiu  jsj£  ^  ip  ^fajp  ip  iP2iitPP  pj  ipijp  pjipp  ip3p 

l  ip*p  %  P2a|  Pjj^teib  :pji  iPiP-Pe  IliPJ  EPP  PPe 


life  $11  lPlPPlPteP  P  P  :2aPJP  IPJPPt  U>  PP1P1PP 
I  rl^Plfr  ihkjl*  PP  IPiiy  JPIX  P  :PJbiL  IPjjptJte 


3313  OUSAK  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


13.  Fire,  the  priest  of  the  invocation,  is  a  king  and 
the  Master  in  our  house;  all  the  births  he  knows,  he  is 
of  all  things  born  the  Knower.  He  is  strong  to  sacrifice 
and  the  Truth  is  in  him;  let  him  do  sacrifice  for  gods 
and  mortals. 


14.  O  Fire,  O  Light  that  makest  pure,  O  summoning 
priest  of  man’s  sacrifice,  today  when  thou  comest  as  a 
doer  of  worship,  today  when  thou  growest  all-pervading 
in  thy  greatness  and  offerest  the  things  of  the  Truth  for 
sacrifice,  today  carry  with  thee  our  offerings,  O  ever- 
youthful  Fire,  even  the  truths  that  are  thine. 


15.  Open  thy  manifesting  eye  on  our  firm-based 
pleasant  things;  let  a  man  set  thee  within  him  to  sacrifice 
to  Earth  and  Heaven.  Protect  us,  O  King  of  Riches,  in 
our  conquest  of  the  plenitudes;  O  Fire,  may  we  pass 
safe  through  all  the  stumbling-places. 

Let  us  pass  beyond  these  things,  pass  in  thy  keeping 
through  them  safe. 


16.  O  Fire  with  thy  strong  armies  of  flame,  sit  with  the 
gods,  first  of  them  all,  in  the  wool-flecked  lair  where  the 
Nest  is  ready  and  the  light-offering;  lead  for  the  doer 
of  the  rite,  for  the  presser  of  the  wine  rightly  on  its  paths 
the  sacrifice. 


17.  This  is  that  Fire  whom  the  ordainers  of  works 
churn  out  like  Atharvan  of  old;  a  Power  unbewildered, 
they  led  him  in  his  zigzag  walk  from  the  dusky  Nights. 


363 


Il^u  tki£  MftlSXh 
I  pp-£-  imp  mhjfcp 


11*11  hhEjfa  k£b  £| 
I  kiJs  :tjie}it  yjiit  it%  Jfeie  ejkii-t 


nfcn  t£t  tiie 

I  fetfeh  ifafeale  4&%  %  ltl% 


Hilifc  tsjt  lejtiiEX  lie 
i  :ht  mtatjiMiej  it  t 

niu  tie  tt^Hltj^ 

I  :i%  Ih^tj  lt^  ltlJ^fc  tittl 


n VQ  a  n  tjuaisj  t  ittiat  tt>tj  tit  tjiM>h$n»  it  ijkiie 
I  kt* 2k  ifcij'i  .title  Mkititi*  tb^L  lit  ktt 


II? ill  :]&ithj  xfeji  lit  ll=kt3t  iHtttetiitt  lie 
I  tetiit.  ltlttet  ttlfet^ 


THId  OIXSAW  UHX  OX  SMI-VAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


18.  Be  born  to  us  in  our  all-forming  labour  for  the 
coming  of  the  Gods,  for  our  peace.  Bring  the  gods  to  us, 
the  Immortals,  the  builders  of  the  growing  Truth;  give 
to  our  sacrifice  touch  on  the  gods. 

19.  O  Fire,  O  man’s  master  of  the  house,  we  have  fed 
thee  with  our  fuel  and  made  thee  a  vastness;  let  the  works 
of  the  house-master  be  unhalting,  make  us  utterly  keen 
with  diy  intense  force  of  light. 


Sukta  16 

1.  O  Fire,  thou  art  set  here  in  all  as  the  priest  of  the 
call  in  the  sacrifice,  set  by  the  gods  in  the  human  being. 

2.  Offer  worship  with  thy  rapturous  tongues  in  the  Rite 
of  the  Path  to  the  Great  Ones.  Bring  the  gods  to  us, 
do  them  sacrifice. 

3.  O  ordainer  of  works,  mighty  of  will,  by  thy  revealing 
light1  in  the  sacrifice  thou  knowest  the  tracks  of  the  gods 
and  their  highways. 

4.  Now  has  the  Bringer  of  the  Treasure  with  his 
horses  of  swiftness  aspired  to  thee  for  a  twofold  bliss; 
he  has  sacrificed  in  the  sacrifices  to  the  king  of  sacrifice. 

5.  O  Fije,  for  the  Servant  of  Heaven2  who  presses  the 
wine,  for  Bharadwaja  the  giver  of  the  offering,  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  these  desirable  things! 


1  or,  with  thy  straight  going 
3  Divodasa 


a.26 


365 


99S 


nun  k>.t>>.5  iiiini 

I  h|  fc£  lhk  hh 


tlfe&ll  :HkLfe  Irtfc'rfcJ 
I  Hiy,-‘h>^j  ifeteJ23£li!fea£  kihlhl 


llUll  HMbfi 

i  )P°-hn?i^Ks  LL  :t  h 


nun  tvanajh 

I  ttjhlhhb  ^&jV$‘jhjt»  ifei  M 

noin^jte  mjii  kj 
i  huit>hc^  (hiifiit  hk(fe  ute  kite 


n'bii  :tekj  ^  tejte  kite 

I  :>W£frj  im>£jk  IP^Jkh  lk^  hi 
U7U  :Ukjl0>  P*hfr 

\  hh  Phi^ft  tyh  is  h£ 

\m\  ^gg(hfe^  &£& 

\  \ft\Ph  \haU&  kihlte* 

U^IlkyM  h^hh±Jrhnk 
\  hk&  tek  1&>  IJte  tehlz 


SHIII  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 


6.  Thou  art  the  Immortal  messenger;  lend  ear  to  the 
laud  of  the  seer  and  bring  the  Divine  People. 

7.  Men  deeply  meditating  aspire  to  thee  that  the 
godheads  may  come  to  them;  mortals  they  aspire  to  the 
God  in  the  sacrifice. 

8.  Bring  into  sacrifice  thy  perfect  sight  and  thy  will; 
rich  are  thy  gifts  and  in  thee  is  the  joy  of  all  who  desire. 

9.  Thou  art  the  priest  of  the  call  set  here  in  thinking 
man,  his  carrier  with  mouth  of  flame  wiser  in  knowledge 
than  he.  O  Fire,  sacrifice  to  the  people  of  heaven. 

10.  Come,  O  Fire,  for  the  advent;  voiced  by  the  word, 
come  for  the  gift  of  the  oblation:  sit,  the  priest  of  our 
invocation,  on  the  grass  of  the  altar. 

11.  O  Angiras,  we  make  thee  to  grow  by  our  fuel  and 
our  offering  of  the  clarity;  flame  into  a  vast  light,  O  ever- 
youthful  Fire. 

12.  O  God,  O  Fire,  thou  illuminest  towards  us  a  wide 
light  of  inspired  knowledge  and  the  vastness  of  a  perfect 
force. 

13.  O  Fire,  Atharvan  churned  thee  out  from  the 
Lotus,1  from  the  head  of  every  chanting  sage. 

14.  And  Dadhyang  too,  the  Seer,  Atharvan’s  son,  kin¬ 
dled  thee  a  slayer  of  the  Python  adversary  and  shatterer 
of  his  cities. 


1  or,  on  Pushkara;  or,  the  Lotus  of  the  head  of  every  chanting  sage. 


367 


89£ 


ufc&u  p  Jziu  fete 

I  Ihfnah  ja  Pi2  b|P>  mme  (Jrlftft  :fe  is 

>Uh>>  ippik 

I  mhP  uu-»ra  P><;tPh|fc>WbK>K  £ 
Ito^u  :pp>k>  {Pmfttem 

I  pp.  mfejih  PJIKPJ  %  B. 


Il'bill  :PJh>£  IrtPIHPfrJ 

I  :PP^i>K  l£fcl>  (P>lk  kJII>>Pjl*> 


I17&II  {mP.E  ml  IfeiS 
I  {£12  jHhftPK  khteJHP-S  p  %k 

llft&tl  ^t>ir>&  :PB  1PP 
I  klPP  PPP  {th  ^  fc  fet  PS 


:kjlii  pymkjh 

I  -^i j  i>p>>m  utc^  ifjibb  £  ^r^Vi 

nV,in  in>ln>,  ppmfe 

i  hhP^n^p  k{pp  mi  m?m  mi  i±p 


3313  OIXSAW  3HA  OX  SNPiAH 


MANDALA  SIX 

15.  Thee  the  Bull  of  the  paths  set  full  alight,  most 
mighty  to  slay  the  Destroyers,  a  conqueror  of  riches  in 
battle  upon  battle. 

16.  Come  to  me  and  let  me  voice  to  thee,  O  Fire,  true 
other  words;  for  thou  growest  by  these  moon-powers  of 
the  Wine. 

17.  Wheresoever  is  thy  mind  and  thou  plantest  that 
higher  discernment,  there  thou  makest  thy  house. 

18.  O  Prince  of  Riches,  the  fullness  of  thy  treasures 
meets  not  the  eye  and  it  is  for  the  few;1  take  then  joy  in 
our  work. 

19.  Fire  of  the  Bringers  is  approached  by  us,  the  slayer 
of  the  Python  adversary  conscious  with  a  multiple  know¬ 
ledge,  the  Servant  of  Heaven’s  Fire,  master  of  beings. 

20.  This  is  he  that  unconquered,  unoverthrown  shall 
by  his  greatness  win  and  give  to  us  a  treasure  beyond  all 
earthly  things. 

21.  O  Fire,  by  a  new  illumination  like  the  old  and  join¬ 
ing  it,  thou  hast  stretched  out  the  Vast  with  thy  light.2 

22.  O  friends,  offer  to  the  impetuous  violence  of  Fire 
the  hymn  and  the  sacrifice ;  sing  the  illumining  verse,  chant 
to  the  Ordainer  of  works. 


1  or,  let  not  the  fullness  of  thy  treasures  meet  the  eye  only  of  the  few;  then 

*  or,  built  the  Vast  with  thy  light. 


369 


Ilo fell  lia  UAi 

I  :PhihK  {kSfoh  :b  hi 


It  ^>kll  IP-bfc  bjll&i 
I  jnhb-bj  {b^PII*  1H  Ikhp  >\bfc 

N?kll  kbjh  bkb  jbfaijle 

I  ItJnKjlP  bcgjmh  Ihbjllt  k^P^Jkjto 


lie\^H  :{biiie  {big  ip^^ipui?  {p-»>p 

I  thlkbfcbj  (P-»htaS  IP|b:>  bile  b  b 


ll^kll  kPteJbfc  ItlPlk-  Pk 
I  :llnb^..b^b  Jbi  &>|g  lb  IfcPife. 


UV^II  friPhMhh  {!*!£ 
I  bib^k  {ihfaijaaJSll  bile  b  {bib 


llxhll  {jibU  kybb  {lib 

I  kink  pg>lkMb^jc<:lPbbjri?  IPIIM>  lb 


Ufeb.ll  :p$lbfr>$  bbb£ 

I  :£bbjife  Ib{bb{b  llib  lbblb  {b  %  b 

3W  OIXSAK  3 Hi  OX  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  SIX 

23.  This  is  he  that  must  sit  through  the  human  genera¬ 
tions,  man’s  Priest  of  the  call  with  the  seer-will,  the 
Messenger,  the  Carrier  of  the  oblation. 

24.  O  Prince  of  the  Treasure,  do  worship  here  with 
sacrifice  to  the  Two  Kings  who  are  ever  pure  in  their 
works,  to  the  sons  of  the  Indivisible  Mother,  to  the  com¬ 
pany  of  the  Life-Gods,  to  Earth  and  Heaven. 

25.  O  Fire,  O  Child  of  Energy,  full  of  riches  is  thy 
vision  for  the  mortal,  the  vision  of  the  immortal,  and  it 
imparts  to  him  its  impulse. 

26.  Let  the  giver  be  the  best  by  work  of  the  will;  today 
winning  thee  let  him  become  one  overflowing  with 
affluence :  a  mortal,  he  shall  taste  the  perfect  purification. 

27.  These  are  thy  men  whom  thou  guardest,  O  Fire 
and  they  find  the  speed  of  thy  impulse  and  move  to  univer¬ 
sal  Life,  fighters  piercing  through  the  armies  of  the  enemy, 
fighters  conquering  the  armies  of  the  enemy.1 

28.  Let  the  Fire  with  his  keen  energy  of  light  over¬ 
whelm  every  devourer;  Fire  conquers  for  us  the  riches. 

29.  O  wide-seeing  Fire,  God  who  knowest  all  births  that 
are,  bring  to  us  the  treasure  with  its  strength  of  the 
Heroes;  O  mighty  of  will,  slay  the  demon-keepers. 

30.  O  God  who  knowest  all  births  that  are,  guard  us 
from  sin  and  from  him  that  worketh  calamity;  O  Seer  of 
the  Word,  protect  us. 


1  or,  piercing  through  the  enemies  who  war  against  them,  (bis). 


371 


ll?fell  tiK 

I  kbfe  t  Jttls  tfc*lr>lf>K  t>Hjnri«a.hfN 


ue\fen  fo*kk  tile 
I  JB&Stt  ittkPn>  iti  bt 


llfefell  bj^btllb  tile 
l  bbbfej  yaytlie  it  i^ii^k  j^t 


nVj^n  ihHjit  tittityi 
I  ^161e  ytimfejtj  lthaj£hj  :6lH  JtUi 


llxfell  :bilie  adi  :21±J11 
I  ihb'hbjlrtlnfejE  iDjmkuJle 

llfefeilkt  bait  bile 
|  feU  kit  rhKk  hllMS>k 


nkfen  tjtmbj  it  m  itt 

|  kP&a?  tifeit  XJh  JLbikj  JE^  b  It 

n ^  fell  mililb  :Klh4P 

I  Pjitifr  bibb  P±  lie  b^I  tile  Jb  Jb 

a'au  oixsaw  3hx  ox  snjaiah 


MANDALA  SIX 


31.  The  mortal  of  evil  movements  who  gives  us  over 
to  the  stroke,  guard  us,  O  Fire,  from  him  and  his  evil. 

32.  O  God,  repulse  on  every  side  with  thy  tongue  of 
flame  that  doer  of  wickedness;  oppose  the  mortal  who 
would  slay  us. 

33.  O  forceful  Fire,  extend  to  Bharadwaja  the  peace1 
with  its  wideness;  extend  to  him  the  desirable  riches. 

34.  Let  Fire  the  seeker  of  the  treasure  kindled  and 
brilliant  and  fed  with  our  offerings  slay  with  his  flame  of 
illumination  the  encircling  Adversaries. 

35.  Let  him  become  the  father  of  the  Father  in  the 
womb  of  the  Mother;  let  him  break  out  into  lightnings  in 
the  Imperishable,  let  him  take  his  seat  in  the  native  home 
of  the  Truth. 

36.  O  wide-seeing  Fire,  God  who  knowest  all  births  that 
are,  bring  us  the  Word  with  its  issue,  the  Word  whose  light 
shines  in  Heaven. 


37.  O  thou  who  art  made  by  our  force,  we  come  to 
thee  of  the  rapturous  vision  bringing  our  offerings  for  thy 
pleasure  and  let  forth  towards  thee,  O  Fire,  our  words. 

38.  Like  men  that  take  refuge  in  the  shade,  we  have 
arrived  to  the  refuge  of  thy  peace,  there  where  thou 
blazest  with  light  and  art  a  vision  of  gold,  O  Fire. 


1  or,  the  wide-spreading  house  of  refuge 


373 


Hixu  miippj  ippp  pppm 

I  kpapj£  ^)P(f^iPiJPft->fr.?  }PP  P^  *P 


iMxll  XPXllit  P}  1P<1S 

I  pprabjs  if,k>ii'i>kt5  PiUt  P>i>x 

nxxii  .nPlhhijPMPfe  lie 

1  hP|b  PJItrK  ll^lh  ^  IBa-K 

llfexll  PiJ^P  IK 

i  :ppip  Pi  uupssipp  h  %  ipsp  tne 

ll^Xll  kpjbllt  ik  Min 
I  hbJPJIPjjtltj  frKj  Pj^PlUv  mi£  ute 

lixii  £ilii  tj  mm  pi  ne 
I  PPUPjfch  lPXlt  Pi  is 

noxii  pxp-jPI  PijPiiiPj 
i  pjrtiy  h  ^  P  ini  P  lie 

ii^fen  p.Kjiii  u£  tne 
I  -l>Pb  p  M^ftt>PJ  Mhlt  pi  PP  p 


anii  OIXSA1V  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SIX 

39.  Thou  art  like  a  fierce  fighter  shooting  arrows  and 
like  a  sharp-horned  Bull ;  O  Fire,  thou  breakest  the  cities. 

40.  They  bring  him  like  a  beast  of  prey,  like  a  new¬ 
born  child  they  bear  him  in  their  hands,  Fire  that  effects 
the  Rite  of  the  Path  for  the  peoples. 

41.  Bring  to  us  this  great  discoverer  of  riches,  bring 
the  god  for  the  coming  of  the  gods;  let  him  take  his  seat  in 
his  own  native  home 

42.  In  the  felicitous  Fire  that  knows  all  things  born  the 
Master  of  your  House  is  born  to  you;  sharpen  to  his 
intensity  the  beloved  guest. 

43.  O  God,  O  Fire,  yoke  those  horses  of  thine  that  do 
well  the  work  and  can  bear  thee  sufficient  for  our  passion. 

44.  Come  to  us,  bear  towards  us  the  Gods  that  they  may 
eat1  of  our  pleasant  offerings  and  drink  our  Soma  wine. 

45.  O  Fire  of  the  Bringers  luminously  lightening  with 
thy  incessant  flame  upward  burn;  spread  wide  thy  light, 
O  ageless  power.2 

46.  Let  the  mortal  who  would  serve  with  his  works  the 
God  in  the  advent,  aspire  bringing  his  offering  to  the 
Fire  in  the  Rite  of  the  Path;  let  him  with  uplifted3  hands 
and  with  obeisance  of  surrender  make  shine  the  summon¬ 
ing  Priest  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  the  fire  of  true  sacrifice.4 


1  or,  come  to 

2  or,  imperishable 

8  or,  outstretched 

4  or,  who  worships  the  Truth  with  sacrifice. 


375 


c\ 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


MANDALA  SIX 


47.  We  bring  to  thee,  O  Fire,  by  the  illumining  word 
an  offering  that  is  shaped  by  the  heart.  Let  there  be 
born  from  it  thy  impregnating  bulls  and  thy  heifers. 

48.  The  Gods  kindle,  most  strong  to  slay  the  Python 
adversary,  the  supreme  Fire,  the  Horse  of  swiftness  by 
whom  the  Riches  are  brought  and  pierced  the  demon 
keepers. 


377 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


08S 


iiViii  kikiklm  kjik  ifeit2  ft  k 
i  kmiijs  ia£k  ttiMi  UfeS  kji  uttty  kite  jk  ik 


11*11  :lklte£  ^autk  :ik  IteJtz 
I  kdfel^te  :y  ±h  ^ttkijs\kkite  k  JS 

ll fell  :ltelk  kijk  hk  P^PW  ilk 
I  gakjk  jk±k  iktetesik  il£  %kjij>  kite 


llh.ll  :ikk|  kite  kk  ^k  {kzltek 
l  p^tjp$  (*phmp.pjttfr  kt.i>h^  jktek  (Hhkijkk 


Hill  hkhkkjhfrlV  i»»^ 

I  hP-lteh  k±kkte  (pp^- p*£ |pr,> > pj pj hj |P  ^  P;]te 


:MMdi^i±  uamt 

^  ^  NJ 


VASISHTHA  MAITRAVARUNI 


SUKTA  1 

1.  Men  have  brought  to  birth  from  the  two  tinders  by 
the  hands’  fall  the  Fire  voiced  by  the  light  of  their  medita¬ 
tions;1  Fire  that  sees  afar  the  flaming  master  of  the  house. 

2.  The  Shining  Ones2  have  set  within  in  our  dwelling- 
house  closely  regarding  all  to  guard  us  from  whatever 
side — that  Fire  which  in  his  home  sits  eternal  and 
all-discerning. 

3.  Verily  shine  out  in  front  of  us,  O  Fire,  with  thy  per¬ 
petual  radiance;  to  thee  continuous  come  plenitudes. 

4.  Fires  come  blazing  out  supremely  from  thy  Fires, 
luminous,  full  of  hero-might,  there  where  are  assembled 
men  born  to  the  perfect  birth. 

5.  Give  us,  O  Fire,  O  Forceful  One,  by  the  thought 

the  wealth  full  of  hero-power,  full  of  progeny  high- 
proclaimed  which  the  Assailant  with  his  demon  magic 
cannot  pierce.  . 


1  or,  by  the  scintillations  of  their  thought  the  Fire  voiced  by  them; 

2  or,  the  lords  of  the  riches 


a27 


381 


Z8£ 


<iUn  krnkkik  mms  ip^u^ 
i  a*  ms  mhm  mrnikis  mi  pjibhkbPPj 


11U11  tl  Sjfe5  hip^i^K 
11m  yh  imyksikkism  unis  kj  mis  ms  m 


iio^n  HiP->isK  MU)  my  ^  h 

i  :imtt  im  iynk^ie  mt  hwkb 


ll'ill  :im  M  i Pkfo  :kjh  k  Jkk 
i  ikk£  :mmjy  :ik  jm±  ^y±K  mis  ^  k  iy 


n?n  :im  kyrnsm  mjh  k  jxx 
i  <tmh  aJs  satyk  ayme  ^  mis  %ik  lie 


ne\u  vp^pj  is 

1  kkatk  l^>kjihP4kji)|Pi>i^b  hsmie  ikiiy 


ll^ll  :pftppjpvpp^>  hk 
I  ^pipp  ym<)k}|yak  uyk  iSkS  :kjkk  kjkk  b£ 


3HIJ  DIXSAH  3HX  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


6.  He  to  whom  there  comes  in  the  light  and  in  the  dusk 
the  young  Damsel,  luminous  bearing  the  offering — it 
is  his  own  dynamic  thought  that  comes  to  him  desiring  the 
Riches. 

7.  O  Fire,  burn  away  from  us  all  hostile  powers  with 
the  consuming  flames  with  which  thou  didst  burn  the 
afflicting  demon,  destroy  Pain  so  that  no  voice  of  her  is  left. 

8.  O  bright  and  most  opulent,  O  Fire,  who  shinest 
and  purifiest,  as  with  whosoever  kindles  thy  flame  forces, 
so  with  us  too,  by  those  lauds  abide. 

9.  As  with  those  who  have  turned  to  thy  flame-force 
mortal  men,  our  forefathers  in  many  lands,  with  us  too 
by  these  lauds  in  thy  right-mindedness  abide. 

10.  May  these  men,  heroes  in  the  slayings  of  the  Cover- 
er,  who  work  out  the  thought  I  have  voiced,  overcome  all 
undivine  mage-knowledge. 

11.0  Fire,  may  we  not  dwell  in  the  emptiness,  nor  in 
house  of  men  where  there  is  no  son1  and  the  hero  is  not, 
but  around  thee  may  we  dwell  in  homes  where  there  is 
good  progeny,  O  dweller  in  the  home. 

12.  This  is  the  eternal  sacrifice  to  which  there  comes  the 
Rider  of  the  Horse,  to  our  house  full  of  progeny  and  good 
offspring,  our  house  increasing  with  the  self-born  Son. 


1  or,  where  no  remainder  is  left 


383 


*8E 


H'b ill  lie  i±£  U±  i±£  y±  Ji±  1PIPV-  HiSl  lb  tafe  :k  lit 

I  bile  y±  ill  frPHS^fel  Ji  llh  BUfiShiis  Ui  lit 


n?iii£iii=  bjuti£  i  k  pjis 

i  g^itijjipi>^  ^j£sut2^  pjiupp^  ktie  yii 

U6\*Uhtol±J  (P^n$  ib£ 

l  iippj  hih§*  ue  PH-nc|>k  pjipMlie  ktie  fei 


H^illll^  vjh 

I  Hh?pj£  fctfjhjft  :kiiiy±ii  iki>£  ipSivpjk  jji  hn> 


\\ViU  :m>  p^>p-  impip'fi 

iklinkX  Mh>.l?^P  PJIhPJ  (PlnM  jitktjioi 

1 1  x  is  1 1  PJilii  liteie  ltubiMb 
I  ilnJlhfotP  mi±P  mil;  kt2 


llfeinkla  bjlhlPPh  U£b  lib 
I  :{MfaK>  Rr>>VPh.  i)ih  kiaihe  yilfci  btie  ib  %lb 


aaw  ousaiai  3hi  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


13.  Protect  us,  O  Fire,  from  the  abhorred  Rakshasa, 
protect  from  the  harm  of  one  who  would  war  against  us 
and  do  us  evil;  with  thee  as  ally  may  we  overcome  those 
who  would  battle  against  us. 

14.  May  that  Fire  go  beyond  all  other  fires  where  is  the 
Horse  and  the  Son  with  the  strong  hand;  traveller  of  the 
thousand  paths  reaches  the  imperishable  things. 

15.  This  is  that  Fire  who  guards  those  who  would  con¬ 
quer,  he  protects  from  evil  the  man  who  sets  him  ablaze; 
the  heroes  of  the  perfect  birth  move  around  him. 

1 6.  This  is  that  Fire  who  is  called1  in  many  lands  whom 
the  giver  of  the  offering  sets  ablaze  and  has  lordship, 
round  whom  moves  the  priest  of  the  call  in  the  rites  of 
the  path. 

1 7.  In  thee,  O  Fire,  we  cast  many  offerings  gaining  lord- 
ship,  creating  in  the  sacrifice  both  the  eternal  Travellers. 

18.  O  Fire,  these  offerings  most  desired,  incessantly 
bring  to  our  formation  of  the  godhead;  to  us  may  there 
come  all  delightful  Powers. 

19.  Deliver  us  not,  O  Fire,  to  strengthlessness,  nor  to 
the  ill-clad  mindlessness,  nor  to  hunger,  nor  to  the  Rak¬ 
shasa,  O  thou  with  whom  is  the  Truth,  lead  us  not  astray 
in  the  house  or  in  the  forest. 


1  or,  given  offering 


385 


98£ 


:k  Ilk  :kj£ijbi  £lh  bb  ^  lte  klbkjklbi  <£11 
I  :kb£  :k£bbk  b£  11  IJlteSak  Hfrpl.t£l  1}  k 


llxhll  :ll<b&  lbblte  klktejljslhfet  kblklk  bl  kb 
I  Wp^p.  life  ns  fe£ygi  kjl  PiSfe)  fe^Pijfc  k»te  <k  <lk 


IlfcfcU  £jh  Pik^g-h  jb>.>jfii  b  kjlll  kjlSl  1£1£  k 

|  kh=j  Pjlj&lte  fe  h^PIfe^  £><kli  kite  <£k  k 


Hhhll  P^ifeP  |P^P  Jkk  fril%  Ikijlkk  lbkkl  kihlte  £  Ik 

I  :klb  b  bkk  bkkS  kite  <k  lk 


llikll£<kll  b<  jbteklte  <l<b  IkSSh  ite  bikj  bk£  Ilk  %>  lk 
I  ip^p  lkH  <£ll£  <fei£  kikbl 


no^n  :k  ilk  :kjlkjli  kJk  bb  ^  lte  klbh<klb±  <£11 
I  :i&£  k|  11  IJII^fr.  kibnltfeb  k  k 


SHIX  DIXSAIAJ  HHX  OX  SNJAIAH 


MANDAT  SEVEN 


- 

,  the  Words,  do  thou, 

they  abide  u 

kinds  ot  we  ^  taptutous  is 

52*?.-------':^ 

error  come  to  us.  Trea- 

„  fnrre  rich  with  Trea 

23-  ^^stoft 

-  — 1  SKr’ 

*eSeeket'  Of  *e  great  and  happy 

which,  O  take  rapture, 

strength  we  m  y 

.  tVie  Words,  do  thou, 
n  Fire,  teach  to  u  may  both  we  3 

*  N°  d  ,h  J  to  the  lords  of  evcr  with 

God,  Slef  t  L  grace,  do  you  P™te 
they  abide  m  thy  h 

kinds  of  weal. 


387 


888 


U^ll  itiahk,  hIPbjfi  hi*jb  IK  IXk* 

l  :kfc  bbSft  IPWKUaE:  t  tek}  Jn£4K  ^ 


V* 

||V)||  Pltv-gboPPP  b  {bfthft  lr.l^>j  l>Pll*  k  fel^  Jfe£ 

|  IPlPbbhb>  bk.iy(P-»bb^  J>£  bj  ^23iki 


UXll  iiksfckJl  »bbj^  |bbb?b3hh  QqhPft  IHrUslK 
I  |b>~>^jb  IPHP  Pl^eb  JS  jkitJK  l)filh>-K  JkjlhH 


llfell  m>taKB;  S^tJK  lkkk  k^kfeabk 

I  wb.ibbJP  |Pb\>  kkk±l±Ki£  X&K  Jk  ki2| 


HfeH  ite>£  PJibkP-  ib^  P-jbb->  :lhkkj  IjtfeK  :kkkS  to 
|  :KJB  b^PUvb  klb|P»  bWIbWUlk^jtt  kXtttellk 


Hill  b^bft  ;upp^pjkt|>  k  :hJ&±  J±ik  fc°^  Khi  h£ 
l  tbhhPb  Plt'b  b$b  Ib-^t  £K  kthkhJB  :k  kifck 


sc  !fc£ 


a-au  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNJ'VAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 
SUKTA  2 

1 .  Cleave  to  our  fuel,  O  Fire,  today,  illumine  the  vast1 
pouring  thy  smoke  of  sacrifice,  touch  the  peak  celestial 
with  thy  up-piled  masses,  then  stretch  them  out  to  unite 
with  the  rays  of  the  Sun. 

2.  Let  us  invoke,  by  the  sacrifices  of  the  lord  of  sacrifice 
who  voices  the  godheads,  the  greatness  of  these  who  are 
pure,  who  are  perfect  in  will,  who  are  founders  of  the 
Thought-gods,  they  take  the  taste  of  both  kinds  of  offerings. 

3.  Fire  who  is  to  be  prayed  by  you  the  mighty,  the 
wise  of  understanding,  the  messenger  between  earth  and 
heaven,  whose  speech  is  truth  kindled  as  the  human  by  the 
thinking  man,  let  us  greaten  ever  for  the  pilgrim-sacrifice. 

4.  Desiring  to  serve,  bringing  the  offering,  kneeling  with 
prostration  they  pluck  the  sacred  grass;  O  priests  of  the 
pilgrim-sacrifice,  casting  it  into  the  Fire  speckled,  with 
luminous  back,  brighten  him  with  the  offering. 

5.  The  seekers  of  the  godhead  perfected  in  their  think¬ 
ing  have  come  with  yoked  chariots  and  flung  wide  open 
the  doors  in  their  formation  of  the  godheads,  they  have 
anointed  him  as  if  the  two  ancient  Mothers  caressing  their 
child,  as  if  rivers  moving  through  level  spaces. 

6.  May  too  dawn  and  night,  matrons  great  and  divine, 
like  good  milch  cows,  queens  of  sacrifice,  queens  of  plenty 
called  by  many  seekers,  sit  on  the  sacred  grass  and  lodge 
with  us  for  our  happiness.2 


1  or,  blaze  out  vastly 

2  or,  be  with  us  for  our  happy  journey. 


389 


06£ 


Hi II  rn  lblbSbbjfebJ  hhlh  lit 

I  ItJfcdiiii  2aJ£jJ2  UaysJi  JJ2  b*Jle 


llj  ill  klk'.tifelh  mklE  1^1  l£lb*  ifeSS  :P]t>jhiw>4iK>  i^jb 
I  :HJ^£  feiB  :|X  In^-^bfe  Iklfchjb  lie 


llo  ill  IHE^  UsJ2  bJHM?  ikj^  |j± 

I  mtyii  ay&njHfcfr  ts^hikfe 


ll'bll  IMS  Jblbbbb  uebX  :boit>fe  :Xtb  mb 

I  bib*  :inl».  bj2abi  bb  K>frjh(h  bbbufeibb 


ll?ll  iibli  JlbMj  ^Pb»H 

1  ibijlltjiaidhfe^  >221  nsjjab  :bJibXLh  jblih  lie 


lie, II  iftJjirHa  Ibbb  bbb  m  i>bl  M  ibaie  lb  ba£ 

I  .tatb  ibbbbib  lb  b±i±  bbt  Jsbkk  Lbb  lbb] 


3iIIi  DIAS  AW  3  HA  OX  SNWAH 


MANDAIA  SEVEN 


7.  I  meditate  on  you,  O  ye  two  illumined  Seers,  doers 
of  the  work  in  our  human  sacrifices,  knowers  of  all  things 
born,  for  sacrifice;  make  high  our  pilgrim-sacrifice  when 
we  call:  you  win  our  desirable  things  in  the  gods. 

8.  In  unison  may  Bharati  with  her  Muses  of  invoca¬ 
tion,  Ila  with  gods  and  men,  and  Fire,  Saraswati  with 
her  powers  of  inspiration  come  down  to  us,  the  three 
goddesses  sit  upon  this  seat  of  sacrifice. 

9.  O  divine  maker  of  forms  who  hast  the  utter  rapture, 
cast  upon  us  that  supreme  transcendence,  cause  of  our 
growth,  from  which  is  born  in  us  the  hero  ever  active 
with  wise  discernment,  the  seeker  of  the  gods  who  sets 
to  work  die  stone  of  the  wine-pressing. 

10.  O  tree,  release  thy  yield  to  the  gods;  Fire  the 
achiever  of  the  work  speeds  the  offering  on  its  way.  It  is 
he  who  does  worship  as  the  priest  of  the  call,  the  more 
true  in  his  act  because  he  knows  the  birth  of  the  gods. 

11.  Come  down  to  us,  O  Fire,  high-kindled,  in  one 
chariot  with  Indra  and  swiftly  journeying  gods;  let 
Adid,  mother  of  mighty  sons,  sit  on  the  sacred  grass,  let 
the  gods,  the  immortals,  take  rapture  in  Swaha. 


Sukta  3 

1.  Create  for  yourselves  in  the  sacrifice  with  a  com¬ 
mon  joy  in  him  the  divine  Fire  along  with  all  the  fires, 
the  strong  for  sacrifice,  the  messenger  who  is  in  mortals 
the  possessor  of  Truth,  inwardly  permanent,  whose  food 
is  Light,  with  his  head  of  burning  flame,  the  purifying 
Fire. 


391 


II€\H  £jih  mi  :bj{£hmtjte  bite  ibHJ^ 

I  >»V$‘jbPhhjlg°\>h  Hjfcifr  bbiliilbi  :b  lbb 


ll^ll  hblit  tejb  bjis  :Ab  b  mbijUalb  bjilibib  ^  b  {b£J 
I  >bihb  b  |Hbi>  m2  bj  >fe{bls  <b{bbi  ^  ifeibS 


||V)(|  :inak  tebilXbJJli  blb|b  {b{b  bibbjbpe  IHIiliJbj 
I  :ik  mjtiteb  b  fr>hbtjb.gabjb  bjbbb  lblb  bbjb 


llxll  tej%b]  lilte  bib  k  kb  b}ii  2abJiiJls  12ab  bb{i 

i  :itn£  Pbbpp  mm2  j&  btete  \Mh  rnmyL  ^  tat  iy 


llfcll  bibb  %  {ib|  bite  {b!  b  bjxi  iife  {MULE  l£ite 
I  :ibmi  iltebbbfe  P^IJnib  bibitebb  b  bib  b£ 


ll^U  P^JHihiO&  bteb  %  bi  tiiUlt  bjlb  bte  {bib  bibite 
I  PI  kite  biih>bft  :£b  ibb  bbabJSlibb  b  {bibblte 

ania  oixsaiv  hhx  ox  snjmah 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


2.  He  neighs  in  his  desire  like  a  horse  in  his  pasture, 
when  he  breaks  out  from  a  mighty  encirclement  the  wind 
blows  in  the  wake  of  his  flame;  now  black  is  thy  marching. 

3.  O  Fire,  when  are  kindled  the  imperishable  flames 
of  thee,  the  new-born  Bull,  and  they  journey  upwards, 
thy  smoke  mounts  ruddy  to  heaven,  for  thou  travellest, 
O  Fire,  as  a  messenger  to  the  gods. 

4.  The  might  of  thee  moves  wide  over  earth,  when 
swiftly  thou  tearest  thy  food  with  thy  jaws,  the  move¬ 
ment  of  thy  march  is  like  a  charging  army;  O  strong 
doer,  with  thy  tongue  of  flame  thou  art  like  one 
sifting-grain  of  barley. 

5.  Him  in  the  dusk,  him  in  the  dawn,  the  ever  youth¬ 
ful  Fire  men  groom  like  a  horse  whetting  the  strength  of 
the  guest  in  his  native  seat;  when  the  offerings  are  cast 
to  him  there  shines  out  the  light  of  the  Bull. 

6.  O  thou  of  the  bright  flame-force,  fair  to  vision  is 
thy  front  when  nearest  thou  shinest  out  like  gold,  thy 
strength  moves  like  the  thunder  of  heaven,  rich  in  thy 
brilliance  thou  showest  thy  light  like  a  Sun.1 

7.  So  that  we  may  give  for  you  with  Swaha,  to  the 
Fire  we  stand  around  him  with  the  words  of  revelation 
and  luminous  offerings;  do  thou,  O  Fire,  guard  us  with 
those  measureless  greatnesses,  with  thy  hundred  iron 
cities. 


1  or,  like  the  light  of  the  Sun. 


393 


it  in  aysik  aysaytte^b  aa  yi  iy 

i  jftLa  ab£  ttyaa  n  <fey*iaaa  aiay  tile 


uiu  :ea  ajiaja  maaj  ijtt  aaajli  yati  taa  ya  a 
i  :£ih  pq^jU'tp  yaaajx  yaa  Laasjii&aiayie  y^lt  a 


iUii  ujiuitj  laaiaj  ayfeSfeyaaaais  latia  ajiaes  yi 
i  WufiR  wk>ia  ay±  a=£  aaia  yaitt  atteik  :a  is 

a  m 


iio^n  :a  iaa  :ajaya±  aib  aa  La  a  ainu  ya*ayai  la&y 
i  aya  aaafc  ate  bj^yfe^  liihya  aae  y±  iah 


ll'bll  :«*»i=>ih  :Ste£  an^aa^  2aajie  itey-kyteia  ya  lie 
I  :Mkai>  lte±a  lb*  Itetei  aiaajlk  :aysjtei  teb£  aatj 


ii?n  ^miiMgfoji*e\>fe  am  ijib  jy  yaia  y*&  :aajia 
i  :iaakky2aai-yia  1a  yiy  liakie  aikia  aya  a  ia  la 


a’aid  oixsai  v  a  hi  ox  snkah 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


8.  The  inviolate  powers  which  are  there  for  the  giver, 
the  Words  with  which  thou  guardest  the  powers  that  are 
human,  with  these  protect  us,  at  once  illumined  seers 
and  thy  adorers,  O  son  of  force,  O  knower  of  all  things 
born! 

9.  When  he  goes  out  pure  like  a  bright  axe  shining 
with  his  own  light  for  his  body,  he  who  was  born  from 
two  mothers  for  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  strong  of  will,  the 
desirable  purifying  Fire. 

10.  O  Fire,  light  up  for  us  these  happinesses;  let  us 
wake  to  an  understanding  of  thy  perfectly  conscious  will; 
let  all  be  there  for  those  who  laud  thee,  for  him  who 
utters  thee;  may  you  protect  us  always  with  all  kinds  of 
weal. 


Sukta  4 


1.  Bring  forward  for  the  Fire,  for  the  brilliant  Light, 
thy  mind  and  thy  purified  offering,  the  Fire  who  travels 
with  knowledge  between  all  the  divine  and  human  births. 

2.  May  Fire  be  the  wise  one  and  the  deliverer  when 
he  is  born  the  youngest  from  the  mother,  he  who  pure- 
bright  of  tooth  clings  to  the  forests,  many  foods  he 
devours  in  a  moment. 

3.  In  the  rendezvous  of  this  god  in  his  flame-force,  one 
whom  mortals  have  seized,  a  white  flame,  and  he  has 
proclaimed  that  strong  human  grasp,  Fire  has  illumined 
that  which  is  ill-lit  to  the  human  being. 


395 


II6MI  :&%  %  *teb  m  kiSA  a 

I  :bJib  :bli  y&b^.  fr>lfl>l^  Sbi}b 


ll^ll  :blli±  hliih  i}h  :>=>».a.U± 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


4.  This  is  the  seer,  the  conscious  thinker  in  those  who 
are  not  seers,  Fire  has  been  set  as  the  Immortal  in  mortals; 
then  lead  us  not  here  astray,  O  forceful  Fire,  may  we  be 
ever  right-minded  in  thee. 


5.  He  who  has  come  to  his  native  seat  made  by  the 
gods,  Fire  delivered  the  gods  by  his  will;  the  plants  and 
the  trees  and  the  earth  bear  him  who  is  the  foundation 
of  all. 

6.  Fire  has  power  for  a  large  Immortality,  he  is  master 
of  a  wealth  bounteous  and  full  of  hero-strength;  O  thou 
who  hast  strength  with  thee,  let  us  not  sit  around  thee 
shapeless,  actionless,  without  hero-force. 

7.  To  be  rejected  is  the  abundance  of  the  riches  that 
bring  no  delight,  let  us  be  the  masters  of  a  wealth  that  is 
eternal;  that  which  is  born  from  another  is  not  the  Son; 
O  Fire,  turn  not  to  wrong  the  paths  of  one  who  knows 
not. 

8.  Not  to  be  accepted  even  though  blissful  is  the  son  of 
another  womb,  not  to  be  thought  of  even  by  the  mind, 
for  he  brings  with  him  no  delight,  soon  even  he  returns 
to  his  home,  let  rather  the  new  Horse  come  to  us,  the 
all-conquering. 

9.  Do  thou,  O  Fire,  protect  us  from  one  who  would 
conquer  us,  protect  us  thou,  too,  O  forceful  Fire,  from 
blame;  may  there  come  to  thee  on  a  path  full  of 
destruction,  come  utterly  a  wealth  thousandfold  and 
desirable. 


a28 


397 


86£ 


I  ^b.mh  |h^  ^-.P-P  :iit|  lUllfeblta  (Ijljl 


llxll  ihfeUja  in&i£Slk±KB  lie  Jli&Ji.  i&lh  fei 

I  u.pp  u>kUb  i>£  ^bjh  £ii?jy  J£±i 


nfen  :fe^abjt£  pifrh  ^x£  -ui^nt-  ^ija 
I  IPHP>|PWjK.I?LK~  lifej  lbfejkfei 


ufcu  ln^fe  pjik  iy  y&y  tymtui  & 

\  kiuiht^j  :bJa£  ifcfeiiy  l£k  IMteJh  :t>yi22lb  fejij  {2al» 


n ^  n  :vg-jN>lH'  fc.kte  b^hHI^l^httL^fej  \h 

|  :)hoPjh  hP>tt>  ^fe£J  iiy  feaXK  fcblUS 

V)  i^k 


[\ol\\  :fc  lfeli  :HjmjJsi  mh  Mi  h&  ^lait  ywlyyi  lMjy 
I  PP^fi  Bfe  hJJ^^J  lliityH  ki&  ^  llih 


sraix  oixsak  shx  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


10.  O  Fire,  light  up  for  us  these  happinesses;  let  us 
wake  to  an  understanding  of  thy  perfectly  conscious  will; 
let  all  be  there  for  those  who  laud  thee,  for  him  who  utters 
thee;  may  you  protect  us  always  with  all  kinds  of  weal. 


Sukta  5 

1.  Bring  to  the  Fire  in  his  strength  a  Word  for  the 
traveller  of  earth  and  heaven  who,  in  the  lap  of  all  the 
Immortals,  the  universal  godhead,  grows  by  those  who 
are  ever  wakeful. 

2.  Fire,  sought  for,  was  set  in  heaven  and  in  earth, 
the  leader  of  the  rivers,  the  Bull  of  things  that  are  stable ; 
he  shines  upon  the  human  peoples,  the  universal  godhead 
growing  by  that  which  is  supreme. 

3.  In  fear  of  thee  the  black*  Tribe,  creatures  unhar- 
monious,  came  away  casting  behind  them  their  enjoy¬ 
ments,  when  O  Fire,  O  universal  godhead,  thy  light 
shone  upon  man  when  thou  torest  them  and  flamedst 
forth  in  his  front. 

4.  O  Fire,  O  universal  godhead,  earth  and  heaven 
and  the  mid  realm  clove  to  the  triple  law  of  thy  workings; 
shining  with  thy  uninterrupted  flame  thou  hast  spread 
out  the  two  firmaments  by  thy  light. 

* 

5.  To  thee,  O  Fire,  the  Words,  thy  shining  horses, 
impetuous  and  luminous  cleave  in  their  desire,  to  the 
universal  godhead,  lord  of  the  peoples,  charioteer  of  the 
Riches,  ray  of  intuition  of  the  dawns  and  the  days. 


399 


I  h-M>  is  P-.jb-»$jBPMk  Pjlht  Pife  Jg^jfe 

II <11  bWJEiy  itJtfiit  kli  iik  kjikkikkk  is  fcitf.Sil 
I  M^nktl!^?-)#  :k h  mpK  Hii&le  IJilfiit  is 


r 

Moll  :Uaysli  :itj£k  htkhjPk  £aJ2  kii  :k  Ijk  Vkibtfc 

I  fejfeb  iliSs  i£lk  iij.  iyi  fekE  :iL±j2i3it  tlK  it  £ 


II7II  fcjbih  hlkfe  mr«  kh  >ibbtbj  Pjb-»hj  :iail  1M2 
1  ;fcbpi^  ya±ik  >Hb*?b  i±as  khip 


I16\II  ktiklkk  hlh2hK’>-  kjK.WPtt'  IPbk  &> 

I  :£ii  HJih  ijh  :idh  kftlfe  ki±y22  J±kh  ikikklte  & 


ll^ll  hlMKhPPPJIb*  k£  J£JU£  kite 
I  P^fak  ikbblij  H  ij  kfe  kboL  jfekte  bSi? 


3313  OIXSAJV  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


21.  21; 


MANDALA  SEVEN 

20.  Now,  O  Fire,  teach  to  us  the  Words,  do  thou,  O 
God,  speed  them  to  the  lords  of  plenty,  may  both  we  and 
they  abide  in  thy  grace,  do  you  protect  us  ever  with  all 
kinds  of  weal. 


21.  Thou,  O  Fire,  art  swift  to  our  call  and  rapturous  is 
thy  vision;  O  son  of  force,  shine  with  a  bright  light.  Burn 
us  not  since  in  thee  and  with  thee  is  the  eternal  Son,  let 
not  the  strength  of  the  hero  in  us  break  us  to  pieces. 


22.  Mayst  thou  not,  who  art  with  us  in  these  god- 
kindled  fires,  denounce  us  for  difficulty  to  bear  thee;  may 
not  wrong  thinkings  from  thee,  O  son  of  force,  even  by 
error  come  to  us. 


23.  O  Fire,  O  thou  with  thy  flame-force,  rich  with  Trea¬ 
sure,  become  the  mortal  who  casts  his  offerings  in  the 
immortal;  that  godhead  founds  in  him  the  conquest  of  the 
riches  to  whom  comes  questioning  the  illumined  seer, 
the  seeker. 


24.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  knower  of  the  great  and  happy 
path,  bring  to  the  illumined  seers  the  vast  Treasure  by 
which,  O  forceful  one,  with  a  life  unwasting,  heroic  in 
strength  we  may  take  rapture. 

25.  Now,  O  Fire,  teach  to  us  the  Words,  do  thou,  O 
God,  speed  them  to  the  lords  of  plenty,  may  both  we  and 
they  abide  in  thy  grace,  do  you  protect  us  ever  with  all 
kinds  of  weal. 


387 


88£ 


n^u  kumiss  Mkiaj£  kkjk  ik 

I  :kfc  iPbPimhp-  j±  jki  fc=y  JniyK  HZ 


nV)H  k££t2kKii  k  mty±K  ini£>j  man  h  Sky  yaE 

|  IPIPbbhb>  hk<H:j<;(Wbhb^  Jii  y  yillfei 


UXll  ltabj$  (bhb^frSKih  O^hPft  IH^KJLK 

I  |U>V$JP  IPPP  ph^p  JS  IkhJK  IlnlhlK  IPhhB 


llfell  p^p-»pjt>p  hivp-^pp  3-hjp  iPPh  ty^feabJi 
I  pb.ibvpp  yiyx  pbP*hK)&6  i£ie  KiSS| 


K^H  H22j}  Pjihttfi  py»PA  :lhtoy  JKfeK  :PPtrS  to 

|  :£fc  ^Pfrh  hlta\P4  h^lhkPIH^jtt  frHWLXK 


Kill  ►>><?&  :PPP4kjhyk  li  :h£i  S±1K  Kay  Kb£  h£ 

1  lb«h^  Pfrh  uyi£  EK  toitotoyto  :Jfe  toitoK 


^  m 


HHIJ  DI1SAH  3HX  OX  SNTMAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


6.  Into  thee,  the  Shining  Ones1  cast  the  Mightiness, 
for  they  clove  to  thy  will,  O  friendly  Light;  O  Fire,  thou 
threwest  the  Destroyers  out  from  the  house  bringing  to 
birth  a  wide  Light  for  the  Aryan. 

7.  As  thou  earnest  to  birth  in  the  supreme  ether  at  once 
as  Vayu  thou  didst  guard  the  path,  thou  cries t  aloud 
bringing  to  birth  the  worlds,  according  them  as  a  gift  to 
the  Son,  O  knower  of  all  things  born! 

8.  O  Fire,  O  universal  godhead,  O  knower  of  all  things 
born,  send  into  us  that  luminous  impulsion  by  which, 
O  thou  in  whom  are  all  desirable  things,  thou  nourishest 
the  achievement  of  a  wide  inspired  knowledge  for  the 
mortal  giver. 

9.  O  Fire,  join  to  us  within,  to  us  made  masters  of  the 
riches  a  plenitude  of  the  knowledge  inspired  wide  in  its 
store;  O  universal  godhead,  do  thou  in  union  with  the 
Rudras  and  the  Vasus  extend  to  us  a  vast  peace.2 


Sukta  6 

1.  I  adore  the  Render,  adoring  I  proclaim  by  my 
speech  the  deeds  of  the  all-ruler,  the  almighty,  the  male, 
as  Indra  strong  and  to  be  rejoiced  in  by  the  peoples. 

2.  Him  they  send  the  seer,  the  ray  of  intuition,  the 
foundation,  the  light  on  the  hill,  the  kingdom  of  peace  in 
earth  and  heaven;  I  illumine  with  my  words  the  great 
and  ancient  laws  of  working  of  Fire  who  rends  the  cities. 


1  or,  the  Lords  of  the  riches 

2  or,  a  vast  refuge. 


401 


ZOf 


IIS\ll  rihohjh  lie  kjy  IMVEfrlPitk  lie 

I  iPftj£  Iklkik  ki&k  lki3k  *k%  lie 


II^U  bfr->hj>.\fchj  kikk  :ktjli^iik£  ibik  Uklkik 
I  •iif.iPUikj  Pjhfc  :k±k£kll  klkJ£  %£kj  bkitli  kik 


UV)U  tltjjlk  :klkjk 
I 


^k  \k§k  Ifc&fcJ  k 
ikkitek  kkkkie  yik  *k 


H*ll  Pk^Ph  P*hhk  kklkSkynk  kt^ie  Jteik  klte\kk 
I  :kJ4kli  :kkk  XkkkilklK  :ykkh  kjkk  kjklhie  ^k 


llfell  kk£kie  j>hl>.lsfefe£te)a  klkkikijikik  klk  Jsk 
I  klkkie  ltekte  L^teijinh  :kikKk  lktejk  k&teki 


XHIi  QLLSAP't  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 

3.  The  traffickers  who  have  not  the  will  for  the  work, 
the  binders  in  knots,  who  have  the  speech  that  destroys, 
who  have  neither  faith  nor  growth  in  the  being,  nor 
sacrifice,  these  the  Destroyers  Fire  has  scattered  before 
him;  supreme  he  has  made  nether  in  their  realm  those 
who  will  not  to  do  sacrifice. 


4.  The  powers  that  rejoice  in  the  darkness  behind, 
he  most  mighty  in  his  godhead  has  made  by  his  energies 
powers  in  front;  that  Fire  I  proclaim,  lord  of  the  Trea¬ 
sure,  who  is  never  bowed,  who  tames  those  that  make 
battle  against  him. 

5.  He  bent  down  the  walls  by  his  showering  blows, 
he  who  has  made  the  dawns  wives  of  the  Noble  Ones; 
he  the  mighty  Fire  has  put  his  restraint  upon  men  and 
made  the  peoples  bringers  to  him  of  his  taxes  by  his 
forceful  mights. 

6.  He  to  whose  peace  all  beings  come  by  their  move¬ 
ments  praying  for  a  right  mind,  the  universal  godhead 
came  to  that  which  is  supreme  above  earth  and  heaven, 
Fire  to  the  lap  of  the  father  and  mother. 

7.  The  god  took  to  him  the  riches  of  the  Foundation, 
the  universal  godhead  in  the  rising  of  the  Sun  gathered 
wealth  from  the  nether  and  the  upper  ocean,  Fire  took 
to  him  the  riches  of  earth  and  heaven. 


403 


I  biM;  it^^u>jMi^i>(t.i>iSjb  frjmn> 


lIXll  l£li!3fe  |gjt+P>j<;lf>(VSPjhfeM  hjltamifcfej 

I  hUah  b  Iftjafrfrj  p^ui*  iRji  ^feaie 


ll^ll  :MisS  ta^Jis  aatejfc  ^Jih  yilldl  ^lfefettej  i>Pi*  ue 
i  k  ^gj^>Hjfe  ^ii  :lj£  %  £ftj£  :&h  jkyais 


Hill  K]HiJ£  itefejh  tii^Lkhals  l±Ui  lie 

I  :klt&  &&£  Iblfe^  JSik  lJ=i  ks  Hash  j^rSih  lie 


Hill  %te|tej  £i^|  ikhi  kllfej  JBiXfcaie  4k  iMt 

t  :tyjl±k  i£j  jdsjife  k  feihiitjJikUiMii  kfej  ^  is 

6\  <£& 


aaia  oixsah  aHx  ox  snhah 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


SuKTA  7 

1.  Even  though  a  god  putting  forth  his  force,  I  drive 
him  forward  as  my  steed  of  swiftness  by  my  prostrations 
of  surrender;  become  the  messenger  of  our  pilgrim-sacri¬ 
fice,  one  who  has  knowledge;  of  himself  in  the  gods 
he  becomes  known  in  his  measured  race. 


2.  O  Fire,  come  to  us  along  thy  own  paths,  rapturous, 
taking  pleasure  in  the  comradeship  of  the  gods;  making 
the  high  plateaus  of  earth  to  roar  with  his  rushing 
stiengths,  with  his  tusks  of  flame  he  burns  the  woodlands, 
all  he  bums  in  his  desire. 


3.  In  front  is  the  sacrifice,  well-placed  is  the  sacred 
grass,  pleased  is  the  Fire;  one  prayed,  thou  art  like  a 
priest  of  the  call,  calling  to  the  two  mothers  in  whom 
are  all  desirable  things,  whence  thou  art  born  most  youn°- 
and  blissful. 

4.  Men  accomplished  in  conscious  knowledge  have 
brought  at  once  into  birth  the  charioteer  who  has  been 
set  as  master  of  the  peoples  in  their  house,  Fire  the  rap¬ 
turous,  the  sweet  of  speech,  one  who  has  with  him  the 

Truth. 


5.  He  has  come  and  taken  his  seat  in  the  house  of 
Man,  the  chosen  bearer  of  the  offering,  Fire,  the  priest 
of  the  Word,  he  who  upholds  all  things,  he  whom  earth 
and  heaven  increase,  to  whom  the  priest  of  the  call 
sacrifices  for  in  him  are  all  desirable  things. 


405 


Ilfeli  :jfelH  t£iz&  Ulbba  Jbll  bi£  :bbh  h%H  liife 
I  ;HiPP»ifc  :feiakbti  hi*  Pb]pfi  :bte  fej  bbte  Jb  lbit 


Mill  i^fefeitJ4i?Jati Pj h 'hS&  Mteji  :amMt  :sfel s  lit  fej 
|  :U>jK-  |Sh  (nPP  (jPp  IP^  £J^i£  igbfi  la  bble 


njjii  Pj^thlPhb  bibtjlie  bibb  Jib 

I  ppp  pSih*|PK  Jtbbb^bb  JbJ±b  IMi  b±£ 


?  m 


lis\ii  :b  lbb  :hjp4jp->  blh  bb  kblle  fcJlfebb  JbAbJbi  bl 
I  Hiu&b  (P$p  \pR  pi it|  isabjb  |b|  bibibl  b 


ll^ll  t’ppfehhjja  irn?  ^  b  lie  linlbbyx  P-^P^jltbj  b  is 

I  biSbie  ijbb  ilb  b  bib  b^PjlhPtbjHJbiB  ilb 


aULi  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SMKAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 

6.  These  have  crossed  beyond  all  by  their  lights,  the 
men  of  strength  who  have  fashioned  excellently  the 
Word,  human  beings  who  have  gone  forward  eager  to 
hear  and  have  illumined  for  me  something  of  this 
Truth. 

7.  Now  we  desire  thee,  O  Fire,  O  son  of  force,  as  the 
master  of  the  Riches,  we  the  Vasishthas;  thou  hast 
obtained  the  impulsion  for  those  who  laud  thee,  those 
who  have  the  plenty.  Do  you  always  guard  us  with  all 
kinds  of  weal. 


Sukta  8 

1.  The  King,  the  Noble  One  is  kindled  high  with 
prostrations  of  surrender,  he  whose  front  receives  the 
oblation  of  the  Light;  men  oppressed  and  opposed  pray 
with  offerings  and  the  Fire  is  born  in  front  of  die  dawns. 

2.  He  verily  is  that  great  one  whom  one  knew,  the 
rapturous  priest  of  man,  the  mighty  one,  the  Fire;  he 
has  found  wide  his  lustres  when  he  is  let  loose  on  the 
wide  earth,  black  is  the  rim  of  his  wheel  when  he  is 
declared  by  her  growths. 

3.  By  what  law  of  thee,  O  Fire,  dost  thou  illumine 
our  purification?  To  what  self-law  of  thee  dost  thou 
move  when  thou  art  proclaimed  aloud?  O  great  giver, 
when  may  we  become  the  lords  and  conquerors  of  a 
wealth  that  is  alP-accomplishing  and  unassailable? 


1  or,  perfect 


407 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 

SnTTTRfrTRTrTFT  5?*%  m  ?T  V[T:  l 

arfa  H:  ^  Tcmg  cT^sft  SIcTRt  3^Tt  3Tfef«i:  5T5lta  11*11 


amfacT  C%  ad^Hlfa  rjft  mtj  for5%fa:  g*FTT  3T?ft£:  i 
5[fm  w^:  rm  anS^r  fn^  g^Tci  n^n 


f?  gg:  5IcRR:  sifarfte:  fgg^f:  \ 

si  irt  ^cftg^T  arm  stanfe  TartfT  u^n 


t  §q|  gf«c?;i  f?iR  mt  ^-rnr  i 

?cr  rrffevirt  to^5  arm  m  Tiff  rgfrrrfa:  rtt  h:  ii'aii 


m% 


3r«ftfir  5ir  TTrrmTTTgtrrT  ^f^nr:  iw:  i 

senfw  sreftfan  ?%q  sW 


H  gSRJtff  fa  p:  T^fat  fTFft  3FF  JTRfam  T:  I 
fmr  rpg>  felt  3^RlfeRTa*ft  T?5T  rRTTO  IRII 


408 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


4.  The  voice  of  the  Fire  of  the  bringer  is  heard  more 
and  more  when  he  shines  like  a  sun,  a  vast  light;  Fire 
who  stands  over  man  in  his  battles  has  broken  flaming 
into  a  blaze,  the  divine  guest. 

5.  In  thee  were  our  many  callings  and  thou  becamest 
right-thoughted  with  all  thy  flame-forces.  When  thou 
art  proclaimed  by  the  word,  thou  hearest,  O  Fire;  perfect 
in  thy  birth,  thyself  increase  thy  body. 

6.  This  is  the  word  that  rose  into  birth  for  the  Fire, 
it  is  a  conqueror  of  the  hundreds  and  with  it  are  the 
thousands,  it  is  twofold  in  its  greatness  when  it  creates 
the  bliss  for  those  who  laud  him  for  the  friend;  it  is 
luminous,  a  driver  away  of  evil,  a  slayer  of  the  Rakshasa. 

7.  Now  we  desire  thee,  O  Fire,  O  son  of  force,  as  the 
master  of  the  Riches,  we  the  Vasishthas;  thou  hast 
obtained  the  impulsion  for  those  who  laud  thee,  those 
who  have  the  plenty.  Do  you  always  guard  us  with  all 
kinds  of  weal. 


Sukta  9 

1.  He  awoke  from  the  lap  of  the  dawns,  their  lover, 
the  rapturous  priest  of  the  call,  the  great  seer,  the  puri¬ 
fying  Fire;  he  founds  the  ray  of  intuition  for  both  kinds 
of  being  born,  the  offerings  in  the  gods,  the  riches  in  the 
doers  of  good. 

2.  Strong  in  will  this  is  he  who  has  flung  wide  the 
doors  of  the  Traffickers  purifying  for^us  the  illumining  ray 
which  gives  the  many  enjoyments;  the  rapturous  priest 
of  the  call,  who  dwells  in  the  house  of  men,  is  seen  through 
the  darkness  of  the  nights. 


409 


II ^  II  4M4  IBltt  bjlk  ii&J&  :i}^  1&£ 

I  rui  y£Lb  Ma  :ill£  Ji  4*>£ 


mt 


H\tt  :±.  &Q.  :kj£ijtei  blh  bb  b*i&  lfe^inkS 

I  Hfc»J>£  Mi  ttjb  fc£  MM*  42a£Jb  JMkkJk  bihlM 


(I'hll  Mfefcbj  MbfeMi  kfe|  JSJb  JMbMJie  IbMt  )Pfrfcik 
I  hlalt  iP&rSs  ISile  ib£  JbabiJ  lk  m£  £]lb  kke 


UXU  uihnj)»  :klk  H|1S  1411*4  42  lkblk  llifekk 

I  lkfakk  abb  JJakk  42  4M$rl 


llfell  'tbbj  He  fc4K  :kk  jtaftMlk  lkkililkbfej 
I  :k  4b  14  :KjPjK>  4kk4kk£i  klbib.fejbjbji^1^  :ikte 


anu  oixsak  ai-ix  ox  snhah 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


3.  The  seer  free  from  ignorance,  the  boundless,  the 
luminous,  a  friend  happily  met,1  our  benignant  guest, 
rich  in  his  lustres  he  shines  in  front  of  the  dawns,  a  child 
of  the  waters  he  enters  into  his  mothers. 

4.  One  to  be  prayed  by  you  in  the  generations  of  man, 
equal  in  his  rays  shone  out  the  knower  of  all  things 
born,  Fire  who  dawns  with  his  light  of  perfect  vision,  the 
rays  woke  into  his  high  blazing. 

5.  O  Fire,  go  on  thy  embassy  and  fail  not  towards 
the  gods  with  the  company  of  those  who  fashion  the 
Word:  sacrifice  to  Saraswati  and  the  life-powers,  and 
two  riders  of  the  horse  and  the  waters  and  to  all  the  gods 
for  the  giving  of  the  ecstasy. 

6.  Vasishtha  kindles  thee,  O  Fire,  slaying  the  des¬ 
troying  demon,  sacrifice  for  the  Wealth  to  the  many- 
thoughted  goddess2 :  many  are  the  roads  of  thy  approach, 
O  knower  of  all  things  born.  Do  you  always  guard  us 
with  all  kinds  of  weal. 


Sukta  10 

1.  As  the  lover  of  dawn  he  has  reached  to  a  wide 
strength  shining,  flaming  out  with  his  play  of  lightnings; 
the  Bull  pure  and  resplendent  he  shines  on  us,  illumining 
with  his  light  our  thoughts  he  wakes  our  dawnings. 


1  or,  happy  in  thy  sessions,  our  friend, 

2  or,  to  her  who  is  the  tenant  of  the  city: 


411 


ukli  ip^jR  iiifc 

1  :aihhlh^hj£i±  :£ihste£  ft  I  IP?  iiyie  ^gjjtUai 


Itill^li  rlthus  lMjl  i^jtj  ft.jji  j.ie 

I  %‘ftr'lh  Uiit£.fei  k  |P*K  ft-*>b^ft»K>  JL^H 

a 


llVill  kifti:  hlfalste  ^  JJSililtllttJhl.  kfeltie  iftihts  h 

I  ft^ft'ilg  ^P°|  l&fej  PfJPOabjb  S»P 


11*11  llMU'btbj  P|gj>kjygjlk> 

I  kat^fe  lib  iittJSk  2k  ih^P  :&jfb  bite  £±| 


II fell  ktMMsJJi  jj^.hk]feh=>$  t^PKfc  ialjiS 

I  :lMi±i%itj  iflisj.3  P^*^ftb^  |ftPH  (>UJ  laatg 


llfcll  :2ak^  llalfefe^  h>2  k.%  lie  i=§  pjip^p,^ 
I  lt±l±  ±!  ^telSJE  lAlfc->P  J±ft  EjUl+ItttafrlOb  lnb-> 


3313  OIASAJV  3 HA  OA  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


2.  It  is  as  if  the  sun-world  shone  out  from  the  day  and 
the  dawns;  they  are  forming  the  sacrifice  as  aspirants  the 
Thought:  Fire  the  godhead  knowing  the  births  runs  wide 
to  his  goal,  the  Messenger,  the  Traveller  to  the  godheads, 
strong  to  conquer. 

3.  Our  words  are  thoughts  seeking  for  godhead.  Come 
to  the  Fire  asking  for  the  Treasure,  Fire  the  carrier  of 
offerings,  fair  of  front,  perfect  in  vision,  true  in 
movement,  the  traveller  of  the  ways  for  men. 

4.  O  Fire,  companioning  the  shining  ones  bring  to  us 
Indra,  companioning  the  Rudras  bring  vast  Rudra,  with 
the  Adityas  bring  the  boundless  and  universal  Mother, 
with  those  who  have  the  illumined  word  bring  the  master 
of  the  word  in  whom  are  all  desirable  things. 

5.  Men  who  are  aspirants  pray  in  the  pilgrim-rites  to 
Fire  the  youthful  and  rapturous  priest  of  the  call;  for 
he  has  become  the  ruler  of  the  earth  and  the  Riches,  a 
sleepless  messenger  for  sacrifice  to  the  gods. 


Sukta  11 

1.  Thou  art  the  great  conscious  perception  of  the 
pilgrim-sacrifice,  without  thee  the  immortals  have  no 
rapture;  come  in  one  chariot  with  all  the  gods,  take  thy 
seat  within,  O  Fire,  as  the  supreme  priest  of  the  call. 

2.  Men  who  bring  the  offering  ever  pray  for  thee,  the 
swift  in  movement,  for  their  envoy:  when  thou  sitst  with 
the  gods  on  a  man’s  seat  of  sacrifice,  happy  for  him 
become  the  days. 


a29 


413 


Ufell  :k  iiR  kih  hk  SdH  HJlblntaS  £x  tk 

I  -IQaPjbPjPjk  Pajbb  tiJtE  |bkj  lf>e»h>  tk 


nb.ll  :km±i  Ik  kk  jainh  Plk4bmbbtP>jS  kiiSJi  Ik  H 
:i^pm  He  Hk  %2a  PJIP>5  IfeSfeJ  iMit  H 


nSjli  ukcr^K  :Pbtbj  jJuei  ifekkiK  IJifeJi  HUttfej 
(  :&kJP  blb(b  (b  Oabjl?  IPkU  l^k  k^Pte 


U  a*& 


Ukl  :J±  liH  Hlh  ka  £jh  tjij  l*to  hi 

I  klP^hblk  m<?ah*S*Pj)b;>  bira>bj£  Ife  Ptlle 


11*11  h$lbba$  lb.SIP'hP'  IbPb  tr>l%  P'K 

I  b±p£  :)atejS  itiHifejH^sihiikJle  JP&e  jt\>pjn> 


llfell  UfelhHiJJihJle  JPl  y±  UHt  ]*jb  &  PtbbaUk 

I  b|j2H±  ^  Pjftb&<bjbj  Ji  :^Pbbb.i;JbJ 


aaia  oiisaw  anx  ox  snivah 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


3.  Even  thrice  in  the  night  within  thee  they  woke 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  Riches  for  the  mortal  giver;  as 
the  human  here  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  become  our 
messenger  and  protector  from  the  assailant. 

4.  The  Fire  has  power  for  a  vast  pilgrim-sacrifice,  Fire 
is  a  master  of  every  offering  made,  for  to  his  will  cleave 
the  Shining  Ones,  so  the  gods  established  him  as  the 
carrier  of  the  offerings. 

5.  O  Fire,  bring  the  gods  to  eat  of  the  offerings,  may 
they  with  Indra  as  their  eldest  take  here  their  rapture, 
establish  this  sacrifice  in  heaven  in  the  gods.  Do  you 
always  guard  us  with  all  kinds  of  weal. 


Sukta  12 

1.  We  have  come  with  a  great  prostration  of  surrender 
to  the  ever-young  Fire  who  has  shone  out  blazing  in  his 
own  home  rich  of  lustre  between  the  wide  firmaments 
and  filled  with  the  offerings  cast  in  him  he  moves  facing 
every  side. 

2.  He  overcomes  all  evils  by  his  mights:  the  Fire  is 
affirmed  by  the  lauds  in  the  home,  the  knower  of  all 
things  born;  may  he  guard  us  from  stumbling  and  from 
blame,  us  when  we  speak  the  words  and  us  when  we 
are  lords  of  the  plenty. 

3.  Thou  art  Varuna  and  thou  art  Mitra,  O  Fire, 
thee  the  Vasishthas  make  to  grow  by  their  thoughts, 
in  thee  may  the  riches  be  easily  won.  Do  you  always 
guard  us  with  all  kinds  of  weal. 


415 


Uh. II  %J)4Sh  kb  frl>.fe?,.U±bbi  hh 

I  ±Mz  HMb  JbttefeJ  ifckJH  bile  H  XX 


n ^ II  hPiiHttib  hh.  ljiiii).i±k  XfejUixIi  :hjujl 
I  :hjPj£pl-  mP^>  P*>PPIP>  Ibtyii 

mt 


Hfell  :l*  m£  :hjP->jP-»  Mlh  pb  Mt  bibj  ;>>r£&  Xblte&te 
I  ih*OJh  :b£  ihjil  li  Vfch  :l?s>h»  IPP*  Ptfrft  |bii£ 


Hill  ifcpSjn  >PiPi?P  mb  bi 

i  :pmhip'  jiuLs  ymji  lie  bmmis  mfejys  kiirni 


1>^  11  k!P\Pb  P  ftl>blkSfe  \hhti£  iy£jb  kfepl  ^it 
>  kmiK  pp^  h±l±  balSstebteJ  fabills 


3HI3  OIXSAIM  3 Hi.  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


SUKTA  1 3 

1.  To  Fire  all-illumining,  founder  of  the  thought, 
slayer  of  the  Asuras,  bring  your  thinking  and  the  thought 
formed;  glad  I  bring  to  our  sacrificial  seat  the  offering 
for  the  universal  godhead  who  has  mastery  over  minds. 

2.  Thou,  O  Fire,  illumining  with  thy  light  fillest  earth 
and  heaven  even  in  thy  birth:  thou  hast  released  the 
gods  from  the  Assailant  by  thy  might,  thou  the  universal 
godhead,  the  knower  of  all  things  born. 

3.  When  born,  O  Fire,  thou  lookest  on  the  world  as  a 
herdsman  on  his  cattle,  one  to  be  missioned,  pervading 
everywhere,  as  the  universal  godhead  thou  foundest 
the  Path  for  the  Lord.  Do  you  always  guard  us  with 
all  kinds  of  weal. 


Sukta  14 

• 

1.  To  the  godhead  knower  of  all  things  born,  by  our 
fuel,  by  our  invocations  of  the  god,  by  our  offerings  may 
we  give  making  prostration,  to  the  Fire  of  the  brilliant 
light. 

2.  May  we  worship  thee,  O  Fire,  with  the  fuel,  may 
we  give  to  thee  with  the  laud,  O  master  of  sacrifice,  we 
with  the  oblation,  O  priest  of  the  call  of  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice,  we  with  the  offerings,  O  god  of  the  happy 
flame. 


417 


Il^ll  I  :Xl>j  Ik 


6% 


HV)U  :pmi&  fciJife  tile  I  lfcfa  ibkXJktyi  Jil.  lfctej  fcifc  jllhi 
H*jl  :b  pj>Pb  I  KPu>\ift  hiPhfr  :££}  t  tefc 

llfell  :t±kjslih  Pik^iPF'  |  :mj?j  £iSi  ^htelhle  1£%  It  H 

\\b\\  I  .Mtthbj  kjiyutife  lash  :b 

1U11  Wh-.ih9^jb  ik  412  1  :bjl  mla  tens  ulays  MEHh£ 

llfell  :fc  U&H  kill  kb  klbi  :Jbl£UB  hlk%  fct£ 

I  :iniJak  m&2bte  jSjib  kthbjibi  hkltj%|  lk  lie 


SHU  OIXSAIV  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 

3.  Come,  O  Fire,  with  the  gods  to  our  invocation  of 
the  gods  taking  pleasure  in  the  cry  “Vashat”,  to  thee, 
O  god,  may  we  be  givers  of  the  offerings.  Do  you  guard 
us  always  with  all  kinds  of  weal. 


Sukta  15 

1.  To  the  bounteous,  one  to  be  approached  with  wor¬ 
ship,  cast  in  the  mouth  the  offering,  who  brings  to  us 
closest  alliance. 

2.  He  who  comes  to  the  five  peoples  of  seeing  men  and 
takes  his  seat  within  in  house  and  house,  the  seer,  the 
master  of  the  house,  the  youth. 

3.  May  that  Fire  guard  the  knowledge  that  is  our 
inmate  from  every  side,  may  he  protect  us  from  evil. 

4.  Now  have  I  brought  forth  a  new  laud  to  Fire,  the 
Hawk  of  Heaven;  he  wins  for  us  repeatedly  the  Riches. 

5.  He  whose  glories  are  desirable  for  vision  and  are 
like  the  Riches  with  their  hero-powers,  for  he  flames  in 
front  of  the  sacrifice. 

6.  May  he  take  knowledge  of  this  cry  of  “Vashat”,  may 
the  Fire  cleave1  to  our  words  who  is  the  carrier  of  the 
offerings  and  most  strong  for  sacrifice. 


1  or,  take  pleasure  in 


419 


OZf 

HV^II  teUfekkfek  ikkj  I  :ohih>p^Mhib  ^jgiih  :h  tk 
llxfrll  :ttjkkl£  IM*S  I  kk^hk  \?ohikt>>hiK>  Jbi  jJh  iisj* 

nfeiu  *ll£l£ahjk  I  :kta.£  ha  k}£  rk&e  lln  lifel  kiln 


iiUii  Whifc  ajii  p<?pjsj  i  :kh  mfej£  yst  ajs^fe  kikik 


llUllkblfe  Sli  fe.r.ltR  I  ^Jt2  ^l»  : kim.it  lkkLklk  Ik  k 


11°  i  II  frplh  :jfejlk  I  : teklkjyS'fcls  kjkk  kjliSi.  Jkile 


ll'bll  Unik^k  littlhk  I  :k]kUh  k;jk  IklKfeJ  JXk  hPlP  ikl  h£ 


ll?ll  ^UihfeiiHkS  I  hthk  ihk^hkt^  iijkjlk  kk&E.  btS 


lis\ll  kill®  kth>|feS  I  Ijhlb  kk  kik£  ktekl  kkk  Ilk  kl 


TRTIX  DIXSAH  71 HX  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


7.  O  Lord  of-  the  peoples  to  whom  we  must  reach,  to 
whom  the  offerings  are  cast,  we  have  set  thee  within 
luminous  in  thy  hero-force,  O  godhead,  O  Fire. 

8.  Shine  through  the  nights  and  the  days,  by  thee  may 
we  be  well-armed  with  fire;  a  hero-force  art  thou  and 
thy  desire  is  towards  us. 

9.  To  thee  men  illumined  come  with  their  thinkings  for 
the  conquest,  to  thee  the  imperishable  One  with  her 
thousands. 

10.  The  Fire  repels  the  Rakshasas,  the  immortal  with 
its  brilliant  fight,  one  to  be  prayed,  the  pure  and 
purifying  flame. 

11.  Bring  us  our  effectuations  for  thou  hast  the  mas¬ 
tery,  O  son  of  force,  and  may  the  lord  of  enjoyment  give 
us  the  object  of  our  desire. 

1 2.  Thou,  O  Fire,  givest  us  heroic  glory  and  the  divine 
Creator-Sun  and  Lord  of  enjoyment  and  the  Mother  of 
the  finite  gives  us  the  object  of  our  desire. 

13.  O  Fire,  guard  us  from  evil,  against  the  doer  of  harm 
protect  us,  O  god;  imperishable,  burn  him  with  thy  most 
afflicting  fires. 

14.  Now  unviolated  become  to  us  a  mighty  iron  city 
hundred  fortressed  for  the  protection  of  men. 

15.  Do  thou  guard  us  from  evil  in  dusk  and  in  dawn 
from  the  bringer  of  calamity — thou  art  by  day  and  night 
inviolable. 


421 


Il^ll  HfcSk  kib  ^iliS  k^b  b  IK: 

I  ftj*  ^  bl  \kfe£  blHhfrb  ikl  bj& 


t  \ V, 1 1  Uh)t>  fit  kj%  KJb  ik%b  XlbbSbJ  Ikjh 

I  >i»n>  Jk  lkj£  biikJhMt  kikbi 


llxll  kb  £k  biii  Ihklfrkk  *klk  lk& 

I  kfe  bk^b  lie  ib&  iikilSk  ^hs>&  kl  lbl  k 

UiU  :ik  :iihik}bj  mibMe  yilltfe  bk 

I  :JQlIs211±  XiklMklbibiibJlp  biik 


Hku  klklkls  JtelX  b£  lk&fe  jfrfcS  :iai 
I  :k§kei  kbbl  k  liable  Pk(b  H 


n ^  II  kPHHP^  hbfeSkj  ib3bi  P|>h2akj%  bKJ 
I  muihu  jU^PPP  kt^e  lb  lkil 


^  mt 


3HLi  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 

,  SUKTA  1 6 

1.  With  this  prostration  I  invoke  for  you  Fire  the  son 
of  Energy,  the  beloved,  tire  traveller  most  awake  to 
knowledge  who  carries  out  well  the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  the 
immortal  messenger  of  every  man. 

2.  He  yokes  the  two  shining  steeds  that  bring  all  enjoy¬ 
ments,  well-fed  with  the  offerings  swiftly  may  he  run;  to 
be  worshipped  with  sacrifice  he  of  the  perfect  Word, 
accomplisher  of  the  riches,  the  divine  achievement  of  men. 

3.  Up  stands  the  flame  of  light  of  this  bounteous  One 
when  to  him  are  cast  the  offerings,  his  ruddy  smoke  goes 
up  and  touches  heaven;  men  kindle  high  the  Fire. 

4.  Thou  art  that  most  glorious  messenger  whom  we 
create,  bring  to,  us  the  advent  of  the  gods,  O  son  of  force, 
give  us  all  mortal  enjoyments,  give  us  that  which  from 
thee  we  desire. 


5.  Thou,  O  Fire,  art  the  master  of  the  house,  thou  art 
the  priest  of  the  call  in  our  pilgrim-sacrifice,  thou  art  the 
purifying  priest,  he  in  whom  are  all  desirable  things,  the 
conscious  thinker;  sacrifice  and  reach  the  object  of  our 
desire. 

6.  O  strong  in  will,  create  the  ecstasy  for  the  doer  of 
the  sacrifice  for  thou  art  the  founder  of  ecstasy:  sharpen 
in  the  Truth  for  us  every  doer  of  the  rite  and  whosoever 
is  perfect  in  expression  and  skilful  in  thought. 


423 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


q*dl'd  R  HtRRt  3RTTHI3H  5^  R>ITR  Il'SII 


frufadi  vd^fcn  fTto  an  arfa  srrarc  fartefa  i 

dT^lTFT  2^t  JTEST  H:  5HT  sfejcf  U<HI 


H  ^  fa^IT  arf^fTWT  fgfCTC:  I 

3FT  T  3IT  T|I  jj^.qlld  =5  ftTEf  ll^tl 


ir  TT«?tfH  «cMi^tn  *rai  sfnirr  «raFrt  i 

m  af^TT:  <R|fa^  5Ict  5fiwftBOTU?o|| 


Iwt  aft  afaroteT:  yift  faronfiraig 1 

gar  gr  fao-dK-p-fq  an  aft  3=1  sft^unil 


H  ^IdKM^TTFT  Sf%HH  3%  3TT  3T^H  I 
?errfil  TcT  fe'dH  gaftqnfrd^RTT  3T5T3  im>l 


424 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


7.  O  Fire  fed  with  the  offerings,  let  them  abide  in  thee, 
the  beloved,  the  illumined  wise  and  those  lords  of  plenty 
among  men  who  are  they  that  travel  to  and  allot  to  us 
the  widenesses  of  the  Rays. 

8.  Those  within  whose  gated  house  the  goddess  of 
Revelation  with  her  hands  of  light  sits  filled  with  her 
fullnesses,  them  deliver  from  the  doer  of  harm  and  the 
Censurer,1  O  forceful  Fire;  give  to  us  the  peace  that 
hears  the  Truth  from  afar. 

9.  Do  thou  then  with  thy  rapturous  tongue,  for  thou 
art  the  bearer  of  the  oblation  with  thy  mouth  and  great 
is  thy  knowledge,  bring  to  our  lords  of  the  plenty  the 
riches  and  hasten  on  its  way  our  gift  of  the  offering. 

10.  They  who  give  to  us  the  achieving  plenitudes  of 
the  power  of  the  Horse  because  of  our  desire  of  the 
great  inspired  knowledge,  them,  O  most  young  godhead, 
bring  safe  out  of  all  evil  by  thy  hundred  fortresses  of 
rescue. 

11.  The  divine  giver  of  your  Treasure  desires  from 
you  the  full  pouring  of  the  oblations;  pour  out  and  fill: 
then  the  godhead  carries  you  on  your  way.2 

12.  The  gods  have  made  him  the  priest  of  the  call  of 
the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  the  conscious  thinker,  the  carrier 
of  flame;  Fire  founds  the  ecstasy  and  the  heroic  strength 
for  the  man  who  performs  the  sacrifice  for  the  giver. 


1  or,  from  betrayal  and  from  bondage 

2  or,  brings  to  you  the  Riches. 


425 


9Zt 


II6MI  :blbi  feb  bj  ibli  *b  <tte  hlb±  :Pteib  blb£  y  y 

113,11  kPiht^  ne  ££  lute  kbbsl  ^tej£  y  bibl 

llVjil  £te  yd  yalSJIb^EK  ltbb  :b%K  lajjhLb  IbbbJ  bib 

llxll  biblihj  bibbte  lb^  bteb  ibyblte  Pjvfe  ilbabi 

llfell  :b%blte  libabil  klh%  tejb  lbbj£  i}jb  bite 

♦ 

Mb.ll  £|b  lte  blib  lbb  bblbibte  bjlbteb  111  bb 
lUll  klb\lobi  bj  Jbbj&ijb  bb  Sbjb  ibbjbfi  bit  bite 

6\<S  m. 


3HII  01XSAK  3HX  OX  S.MWAH 


MANDALA  SEVEN 


SUKTA  17* 

1.  O  Fire,  become  high  kindled  with  the  plenty  of 
thy  fuel,  let  the  sacred  grass  be  spread  wide. 

2.  Let  the  doors  of  aspiration  swing  open ;  bring  here 
the  aspirant  gods. 

3.  Go,  O  Fire,  sacrifice  to  the  gods  with  the  offering; 
make  good  the  ways  of  the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  O  knower 
of  all  things  born. 

4.  He  makes  good  the  ways  of  the  pilgrim-sacrifice, 
the  knower  of  all  things  born;  he  sacrifices  and  gladdens 
the  immortal  gods. 

5.  Conquer  all  desirable  things,  O  conscious  thinker, 
may  our  yearning  today  become  the  Truth. 

6.  Thee  they  have  established  as  the  carrier  of  offerings, 
O  Fire,  the  gods  have  founded  thee,  the  Son  of  Energy. 

7.  Those  may  we  be  who  give  to  thee,  the  godhead,  go 
vast  upon  thy  way  and  found  for  us  the  ecstasies. 


427 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


iisui  mij  iBBiftiM  j±ii£ 
l  BlteibB  Bfeajlblh  BBB  ^fctfct  \j¥>i»  a  lie 

ll^ll  |blB|ityB  Bijle  I  BB!£  B^Bit  B£  ^smiKfej  ism 
l|V)ll  :tt£^Bll£  (BlfiBJ  I  rhIHi  BIB  IJJa  B  BiiBBie  £BB 
11*11  :BBB1B  Jajfe  BIB  I  BiBB  BB  kfctBiB  BBJ  BiJB 

llfell  :<PJiK  BBOBBle  I  :B£B1B  BJJBB  Bs.l]  hfelriiBfel  B 

llhll  HIlftUteaUB^  Bile  I  B&&  BBUBJ  JBiBlS  BJBM 

Hill  :B£^BaBB  Bl  I  IBaBiB  lie  Bjie  1BBB  BiBM 

a 


:£nl&  :J 


VATSA  KANWA 


SUKTA  11 

1.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  guardian  of  the  law  of  all 
workings,  thou  art  the  divine  in  mortals;  thou  art  one  to 
be  prayed  in  the  sacrifices. 

2.  O  forceful  one,  it  is  thou  who  art  to  be  expressed  in 
the  findings  of  knowledge;  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  charioteer 
of  the  pilgrim-sacrifices. 

3.  So  do  thou  remove  away  from  us  the  enemies,  O 
knower  of  all  things  born,  even  the  undivine  and  hostile 
forces,  O  Fire. 

4.  Even  when  it  is  near,  O  surely  thou  comest  not  to 
the  sacrifice  of  our  mortal  foe,  O  knower  of  all  things 
born. 

5.  Mortals  illumined  we  meditate  on  the  many  names 
of  thee  the  immortal,  the  knower  of  all  things  born. 

6.  We  call  the  Fire  with  our  words,  illumined  we  call 
the  illumined  for  our  guard,  mortals  we  call  the  god  for 
our  protection. 

7.  Vatsa  compels  thy  mind  even  from  the  supreme 
world  of  thy  session,  O  Fire,  by  his  Word  that  longs  for 
thee. 


431 


11*11  ja&fc  taS  mk  ^  fc 

I  kbfcHi£2at&  fem±B|feJ\feS  IiitS  liihk  Jl£i£ 


ilfeu  k£feS  lafes  taK 
I  Whikk»P^  1^  ££  5kte^  ua  2al£ji2 


uinkiaS  iaiikjkK  j&j.^  Jtaie 

ikiSiH  JBagj^hhtJhH^J^fefeJ  iiiaj  JJJiikWy 


I  iJiiJI-ii  miafe  Alntei  ltofeli  M 

:hhl&  :Hi±lB 

^  \» 


11°  ill  titeh  iitkhyi  fe  htk^i^hKhj  ^  kim  ita 
i  ia].ti  acija;  fe=ji±H  jE^nae  ^ 


ii^ii  iui'aii&jy 
I  |h]fe£  l&ftte.lfe 


I  :ttK  ke  U=£feJ 


II7II  iw  &hH 

l&bl  %  ifekS 


ii'au  oixsAi-v  am  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


8.  Thou  art  the  equal  lord  of  all  peoples  in  many 
lands;  we  call  to  thee  in  the  battles. 

9.  We  call  to  the  Fire  to  guard  us  in  our  battles,  we 
who  seek  the  plenitudes;  in  the  plenitudes  richly 
manifold  is  his  achievement. 

10.  For  thou  art  of  old  one  to  be  prayed  in  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifices,  and  from  time  eternal  thou  sittest  as  the  evcr- 
new  priest  of  the  call;  O  Fire,  gladden  thy  own  body  and 
bring  happiness  to  us  by  the  sacrifice. 


SOBHARI  KANWA 
SUKTA  19 

1.  Affirm  that  godhead  of  the  sun- world,  the  gods 
set  the  divine  traveller  to  his  race,  they  brought  the 
offering  to  the  world  of  the  gods. 

2.  O  illumined  seer,  pray  the  Fire  opulent  in  his  gifts, 
rich  in  his  lustres;  the  guide  of  this  Soma  sacrifice  pray, 
O  Sobhari,  for  the  rite  of  the  path,  the  Ancient  one. 

3.  We  have  chosen  thee  the  mightiest  for  sacrifice,  the 
divine  in  the  divine,  the  immortal  as  the  priest  of  call 
of  this  sacrifice,  the  strong  of  will, — 

4.  The  Son  of  Energy,  the  Fire,  happy  and  radiant 
and  most  glorious  in  his  light;  may  he  win  for  us  by 
sacrifice  the  bliss  in  heaven  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  and 
the  bliss  of  the  waters. 


433 


IlHH  U2  l-tel 


oinkii  ippjp  :i&  a  :hjLbfei  a  mtjH  :&j.fete  yi 

I  £tell£  H  BJ2aiy  idlkaJts  h±h 


n'bii  uibja  Siihjys  & 

\  :bi|sjs  h  likS  jLSle  Jtt 


II7U  Hllr^bX  lU'IV  j^XfehlB  Mijli  bjl8  yilhtt  ^ 
I  :E^  b  Jfel  y±isyuyty  kfeJBJK:  IHhttjSK 


IICMI  :jt 


I  ^h  ^£i£  <i±&  hllrt  :kji±ijle  ^  Jkkifci 


I 


n>m  PlfcP  P$lr>h  ]±  PP-tPS  (litii  k 

I  :j£b  ppptjla  (r^P^Piitife  p-»k^>. 


n^n  mhk  yi 

i  >?p»fr  yik  »tit>t>  ^2  jkliie  k  ifcJttjB*  :k 


3HXI  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNPVAH 


taANDALA  eight 


5.  The  mortal  who  with  the  fuel  and  the  oblation,  with 
knowledge  and  with  surrender  has  given  to  the  Fire, 
who  is  perfect  in  the  pilgrim-rite, — 


6.  Swift  gallop  his  war-horses,  most  luminous  is  his 
glory,  neither  calamity  wrought  by  the  gods  nor  evil 
wrought  of  men  can  come  to  him  from  any  part. 


7.  High  of  fire  may  we  be  with  your  fires,  O  son 
of  force,  O  lord  of  Energies!  for  thou  hast  the 
hero-strength  and  thy  desire  is  towards  us. 

8.  As  our  friendly  guest  finding  our  expression  for  us, 
Fire  must  be  known,  and  as  our  chariot;  in  thee  are  all- 
accomplishing  foundations  of  ease,  thou  art  the  king  of 
the  Treasures. 


9.  That  mortal  is  sure  in  the  giving  of  his  pilgrim- 
sacrifice,  O  happy  Fire,  he  is  one  to  be  proclaimed, 
may  he  be  a  conqueror  by  his  thoughts, — 


10.  One  for  whom  thou  standest  high  exalted  over 
his  pilgrim-sacrifice,  he  is  a  master  and  hero  and  accom¬ 
plishes, — he  conquers  by  the  war-horses,  by  the  luminous 
seers,  by  the  heroes,  wins  his  work  achieved. 


11.  He  in  whose  house  Fire,  in  whom  are  all  desirable 
things,  maintains  his  body  and  his  affirming  laud  and  his 
delight  and  the  offerings,  he  occupies  the  field  of  his 
occupancy. 


435 


03 


sr 


s 


ta 

3 


ay 


UY,J»  :bs!l  MbB  fc±B 
I  klnjfej^  as  biB  fcSmtt  bb  Ih  IhhiB  bibb 


Hxin  bh>JlR  bl  bbkkifi  BJie  IBB  ythS  :RJ*te  B  B%SbJ 
l  :hBt  h»>kjhih  ty>pitifr  \pifejbj  jb  IbBJB 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


12.  O  son  of  force,  for  the  illumined  seer  who  lauds 
thee  and  is  most  swift  in  his  givings,  create  for  that  seeker 
of  knowledge,  O  Shining  One1,  the  word  in  which  the 
mortal  is  above  the  godhead  below. 

13.  He  who  by  his  gifts  of  the  oblations  or  by  prostra¬ 
tions  of  surrender,  or  by  his  word  illumines  the  Fire,  who 
brings  his  right  judgment,  and  the  swift  action  of  his 
light, — 

14.  He  who  with  his  stimulation  by  the  fuel  serves  with 
the  seats  of  the  session  of  the  Fire,  the  Boundless,  that 
happy  mortal  exceeding  men  by  his  thoughts  and  by 
his  lights  passes  beyond  all  things  as  one  who  crosses  over 
waters. 

15.  Bring,  O  Fire,  that  light  which  overcomes  in  the 
house  whatever  devourer  or  wrath  of  any  being  with 
evil  thoughts. 

16.  The  light  by  which  Mitra  sees  and  Varuna  and 
Aryaman,  by  which  lords  of  the  journey  and  Bhaga, 
that  light  may  we  worship,  we  made  by  thy  force  per¬ 
fect  knowers  of  the  path  guarded  by  the  lordship  of  the 
Puissant. 

17.  O  Fire,  those  are  perfect  in  their  thought  who, 
themselves  illumined,  have  set  thee  within  them,  O 
illumined  seer,  thee,  O  godhead,  divine  in  vision  and 
strong  in  will. 


1  or,  O  lord  of  the  Riches, 


437 


Il^kll  toflppft  :to£to 

I  :ttohie  pmtoA  itoitotoi  fcitoto 


llxku  :toitoJte  g-sg  Itgp  Uto?.toi  lagtolfc  UBlfefej 
I  ltohgtofi  mite  toto  mpj'Lii  lPh>hHtoa$  Ite 


llfc>»  tofrlnlPJ  £>1  i£k 
I  £  P>KPgh\jiflE  g^lxhjtoto  iSto 


Itkkll  :to§m*jtofttot]Htog&  :ggtotoJ±  toJiig  :to 

I  hP>fr>MU  g*fc  gMl  ftllnttP  hlhtlt-h.pj 


IIU.II  khPltoteP  Satojto 

i  £j>j±p^  ifefr  h  topjki  mg  22| 


Oku  :kJ2agg£  g  JLtototo  mfeis  igt  pjtoto  llhg  feK 
I  Sjhto  itoto  hfetofr  fealcil  :toto  £k 

\  A 


llUll  :toP4l*?K  to£  l£h 

l  :>J=3te  JXto  toh£  :togi  1SH  gilrntgie  g*  JSk 


II? Juntos  totofe  gi  to  kte  VkhtotosgtJteJLto  to 
I  tojtoj  gfejto  tog*  to  tojJiK  to  tok£  togs  to£  to 


a'au  ousAiAi  3hx  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


18.  They  have  made  their  altar  and  their  offering, 
O  happy  Fire,  and  their  libation  of  the  wine  in  heaven, 
they  have  conquered  by  their  plenitudes  a  mighty  wealth 
who  have  cast  into  thee  their  desire. 

19.  O  felicitous  god,  happy  to  us  art  thou  fed  with  the 
offerings,  happy  thy  giving,  happy  the  pilgrim-sacrifice, 
happy  our  utterances. 

20.  Create  for  us  a  happy  mind  in  the  piercing  of  the 
Coverers  by  which  thou  mayst  overcome  in  the  battles; 
lay  prostrate  many  firm  posidons  of  those  who  challenge 
us,  may  we  conquer  them  by  thy  attacks. 

21.  I  pray  with  the  word  the  Fire  set  in  man  whom  the 
god  sent  in  as  the  messenger  and  traveller,  the  carrier  of 
offerings,  strong  to  sacrifice. 

22.  To  the  ever-young  Fire  shining  with  his  sharp  tusks 
of  flame,  thou  singest  delight,  Fire  who  fed  with  the 
offerings  of  light  forms  by  true  words  a  great  strength. 

23.  When  he  is  fed  with  the  offerings  of  light  the  Fire 
like  one  full  of  might,  works  his  blade  upwards  and 
downwards  and  carves  for  himself  a  shape. 

24.  The  godhead  set  in  man  who  speeds  the  offerings 
in  its  fragrant  mouth,  perfect  in  the  pilgrim-sacrifice 
illumines  all  desirable  things,  the  divine  and  immortal 
priest  of  the  call. 

25.  O  Fire,  fed  with  the  offerings,  O  son  of  force,  O 
friendly  light,  if  thou  wert  the  mortal  and  I  the  immortal, — 


439 


on 


ID-SII 

I  Jibb2ajitjb±  babftlb  :bik^l  h-^ihp 


llifell  HJbiii  b£ib  lb&  :bty  jjj 

I  £b  lbloabj  :kli3±£  JQMjSfe  J£ib  blfeayt  |P-»«  bb 


llofeu  M  Mb 

I  :JttJhJfcMfc  ibjbjjbb  bile  Jb  b 


ll^ill  bbli  Mbl  bisibh  Jbb  PjbK  :§i»bjifcp 
I  :bjb*jl£-s  bb  btikjbjli.  bb  bbb  Lbisb  bb 


H?fcM  :MJ±  ibb 

I  y*b  little  hfrP  :Hjl<?abjUPJPjtg  U.k^lbP 

MS\hM  :bj£  Un  a  §b  ibb  lie  lajil  Jbb£  :b£  p£hj 


ll^ill  I bhl h  b  WMM  :b^jl  b  lb(PmP|P->  ^  t 

I  bbb  blblblh  b  Jbb  bbiiihjlbyili  Ibi  b 


3HIX  DIXSATC  HHX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


26.  I  would  not  give  thee  over  to  the  Assailant  or  to 
sinfulness,  O  benignant,  O  shining  one;  he  who  lauded 
me  would  not  be  one  without  understanding  or  miserable 
nor  one  plagued  by  guilt,  O  Fire. 

27.  He  is  like  a  son  well  nourished  in  the  house  of  his 
father;  may  our  offerings  reach  the  gods. 

28.  O  Fire,  O  shining  one,  by  thy  closest  guardings  may 
I,  the  mortal,  be  ever  companioned  by  the  favour  of  the 
god. 

29.  By  thy  will  may  I  conquer,  O  Fire,  by  thy  gifts, 
by  thy  revealing  utterances;  for  of  thee  they  speak  as 
the  guiding  Thought  in  me.  O  Fire,  have  joy  for  the 
giving. 

30.  By  thy  guardings  in  which  is  the  strength  of  the 
heroes  and  the  bringing  of  the  plenitudes,  he  drives 
forward  on  his  way  with  whom  thou  hast  chosen 
friendship,  O  shining  one. 

31 . 1  the  blue  stream  of  thee  with  its  cry  is  faithful 

to  the  law  of  its  Truth,  even  as  it  is  kindled  it  takes  what 
is  cast  in  it;  thou  art  beloved  of  the  great  Dawns  and 
thou  shinest  in  the  dwelling  places  of  the  night. 

32.  We  the  sons  of  Sobhari  have  come  to  the  Fire 
with  its  thousandfold  mass  of  flame,  strong  in  its  ap¬ 
proach  for  protection,  imperial,  the  Fire  of  the  Terror 
of  the  Destroyer.2 


1  Sif(io  not  translated  *  or.  Fire  of  Trasadasyu. 


441 


Zff 


Hill  klblbi  tbfebabj  bSi 

I  m  j  jUPbfcbl  bffjlfttaUbbbj  pi  bib 

Hill  kafeJ^l^htiitHbSiiaiJ£ 
I  bbb^Pita  biteb  bsjbis  Sj  ifea2y| 

^  'Mt 

:]&bl£  lJ±J±£&fci 


U6\fell  :bjh  jbifrbjfcb  kbit.  lbkits  :blb£  liyHibb  ilnJ&iy 
l  faJbiS  Jfejte  IbHibS  :)biy£ibbj.ts  i±  b£ 


IlkfcU  :bjhiii  :ble 

I  blPbbb->bPk  pitlb-ch  Ih-pS^b  Jjiibte 

ll^fcU  :bal  b4Pb^iir»>  ktbltehj  ls&h  ^  iife 
I  Lie  jbblb  P^frtfr  :$b^f.hbo-bj  <fe  IHbl.i  Lb 


llxfell  :bbli£  myaH 

|  PMb  bbP  ilh  I^Lie  \PlfrPbjlbb 

Ilfefeu  kbbb  lojlbte  bb  jHhfe  £b  iy  IbiE  t  ^hbj 
l  b£  j±Lfe  bkite  bite  bite  ^  bib 


jrau  DIXSAJ-M  HHX  OX  SNJ-MAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


33.  O  Fire,  other  fires  dwell  dependent  on  thee  as 
on  a  tree  its  branches;  I  annex  to  me  the  illuminations 
of  men  and  their  lights,  increasing  so  thy  warrior  forces. 

34.  O  sons  of  the  boundless  mother,  you  who  betray 
not,  great  givers,  the  mortal  whom  out  of  all  possessors 
of  riches  you  lead  to  the  other  shore, — 

35.  For  you,  the  kings,  who  have  power  over  seeing 
men,  choose  one  or  another  to  have  mastery  in  the 
human  ways, — such  may  we  be,  O  Varuna,  O  Mitra, 
O  Aryaman,  charioteers,  indeed,  of  the  Truth. 

36.  The  Terror  of  the  Destroyers,  son  of  the  master  of 
wide  vision,  has  given  me  the  brides  seven  hundred,  he 
is  a  bounteous  giver,  the  noble,  a  lord  of  beings. 

37.  And  so, -for  me  at  the  ford  of  the  wide-flowing  and 
forward  streaming  river  of  the  happy  dwelling  places,1  came 
the  bay  horse,  leader  of  the  three  seventies.  May  he  become 
an  opulent  master  of  the  things  that  are  to  be  given. 

VISHWAMANA  VAIYASHWA 

Sukta  23 

1 .  Pray  the  Fire  as  he  fronts  you,  worship  with  sacrifice 
the  knower  of  all  things  born,  Fire  with  his  driving  smoke 
and  his  unseizable  light, — 

2.  Fire  who  is  like  the  string  of  speeding  chariots  to  a 
competitor  in  the  race;  O  all-seeing  universal  mind, 
laud  him  with  the  word. 


1  or,  the  river  Suvastu, 


443 


Ilo^lt  :h£U£l2  IkfefcJ  kkJK:  m 
I  :MUii  htk  mU£J2  .HPivfejie  |k  l^ie 


U'bU  jX-iXXXbkfc  feb  ih£ 
I  mij  ktelli  XikX  )fehlkhi--lbdij3,fe 


II7II  kJfelHbtkkjS  kiL  k  fettj 
I  ki  kikk&  Lh&  h  tXkk.VhHJkX 


II6MI  fc£±  :te  1±M  kli  ifelk  ikhk 

V. 

1  kliiUntik  imjk  fel  .bib  :k  ldijie 


ll^ll  :p£ifc>h»£  JxHfe  yil  Lfctfc 
l  M.gte  lha$PjP->jH;ft  |jlb  biie 


llVtU  :kji=bMi  ik^h  U±iH  lMhJls 

I  ihi&  lh»^  (Mfc.P4  ifesfei  2akJ  l£ 


llxll  tbteJMi  hihate&i 

I  i£sJ£J22  kte£Lfejm  hi££ 


UkH  Bfe  ]£fejh£ 

I  itHkJ  feiifeh  :iat  J2hij3fe  fcl&iiUJak 


'J>IIi  DIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNJVAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


3.  Those  on  whom  he  presses,  possessor  of  the  word 
of  illumination  and  seizes  on  their  impulsions  and 
their  satisfactions,  by  their  approach  to  knowledge  the 
Fire  finds  the  Treasure. 

4.  Up  stands  his  ageless  light  as  he  flames  out  with 
his  burning  tusks,  in  his  beautiful  splendour,  in  the 
glory  of  his  companies. 

5.  Even  so,  stand  up  as  they  laud  thee,  O  doer  of  the 
pilgrim-rite,  shining  out  with  thy  divine  light,  with  thy 
vast  all-regarding  lustre. 

6.  Go,  O  Fire,  with  perfect  utterances  of  the  word 
offering  uninterruptedly  the  oblations,  since  thou  hast 
become  the  messenger  and  the  carrier  of  the  offerings. 

7.  I  call  for  you  the  ancient  Fire,  the  priest  of  the 
call  of  seeing  men;  him  with  this  word  I  declare,  him 
for  you  I  laud. 

8.  Fire  whom  with  the  sacrifices,  with  the  light  verily 
they  speed  like  a  friend  firmly  established  in  the  man 
who  possesses  the  Truth. 

9.  To  Fire  the  possessor  of  the  Truth,  the  accomplisher 
of  the  sacrifice,  the  seekers  of  the  Truth  have  come  with 
the  word  and  cleave  to  him  in  the  seat  of  the  adoration. 

10.  Let  our  sacrifices  go  towards  him  united  in  their 
effort,  to  him  most  fiery-wise  of  the  Angirasas  who  is 
the  priest  of  the  call  in  men  and  most  glorious. 


a31 


445 


II V ^  II  kPhlSfcj  PjPPIftq$  q»Plh 
I  :mh  k£  P?tn>  m  J±1 

u?iu:kk  ^bPjb  y±kb  k£  jka& 

|  jjtrkP£  Jklk£  ^ki^P  kk 


ne^n  W^ppiu'  t±h  itk  j^mic 
I  Pt?NPh>IP(j*  J=y  ik^kakb  lklSk 


llfe^ll  ^JtHJ?.hjP  l^  k  |k 


11^11  :kjPji^h^  ]Sife£  bkke  lb 
I  :kkt  P|!H>fi>J  kk  ikblk  bil k  k 


llxinj^k  JktSl  ihSp^PhjiP  kj 
I  tjhSkj  l\k  lrth(P->  %  ikkk  kibkak 

life l II  kJJMi  kjl&l  kjb  :kijk^kj 
lykj  Jkkk  JkJb£  :kl5J  :kjb£kj  £  lk  feb 

llk&ll  Ikkktk  bkk  %jkkk  kib 
I  kb^kS  k^>i>  bjl  kh  jjkiE  k  ki  k 

llUll  :kb(kl»JPAJftkk  kl  ikiK 
I  :ikt  kik  mipih.^p-^  bi  kk  kke 


33M  OLLSAPM  3H1  Oi  SNWAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


11.  O  ageless  Fire,  those  lights  of  thine  kindling  the 
Vast  are  like  male  and  mighty  horses; 

12.  So  do  thou,  O  Lord  of  Energies,  give  us  the  wealth, 
hero-might;  protect  us  in  our  battles,  in  the  Son  of  our 
begetting. 

13.  Since,  indeed,  the  lord  of  the  peoples,  keen  and 
glad  in  the  house  of  man,  wards  off  all  demon-powers, — 

14.  O  Fire,  with  thy  hearing  of  my  new  laud,  with 
thy  burning  flame,  consume  utterly  the  demon  magicians, 
O  hero,  O  lord  of  the  peoples. 

15.  Not  even  by  magic  can  the  mortal  foe  master  the 
man  who  offers  worship  to  the  Fire  with  his  gifts  of  the 
oblation. 

16. *  *  *  * 


17.  Thee  Ushana  of  the  inspired  wisdom  set  within 
for  men  as  the  priest  of  the  call,  the  doer  of  sacrifice, 
the  knower  of  all  things  born. 

18.  For  all  the  gods  with  one  mind  made  thee  the 
messenger;  O  godhead,  thou  bccamest  by  inspired 
knowledge  supreme  and  a  lord  of  sacrifice. 

19.  Him  immortal  let  the  mortal  hero  make  his  envoy, 
the  purifying  Fire  with  his  black  path,  vast  in  his  wideness. 

*  Not  translated 


447 


m 


u?hn  saiyk  i^u  mi 

|  hfa)b.  bibb-  P>*:lr.-Hftf»  ^b  £P 

l)6\kH  rbbitefe  <Pt?ltett  teib|l2& 

I  :Mm£  :JULi  bib  k£  Ibib  lb  ibife 

U^fcH  lijljb  tejUibk  bbjJa  JiJ  bus 
I  j  ft  bib  bjml  kjsjHb  bjie  lteibj  \ki± 

l<V>fcll  (^hl^K  (jfthbtjte  ikfej 

I  bb;  Hnlftblh  i^te 

nxhn  ftb>iftift->t>  btftb 
|  Pbhb>b.-i  ^blSbj  fthbb 

life  til  bbjm&b  :bj%bhjlga^jb 

I  PbbfcbobJIOabf'  bP>lbbbjbjlk> 

llkfel)  \PbqbjS  IPbP  PJbtt  PJK 
|  bboft  ftitb  PtjkPb^PUt'  PbK 


nun  :iin  kas  ati  a  bib  ijh 

I  PhfejsjPh  P]§l>NJPJIt»h^  kite  ^2 


iiohu  ktegj(hb>K 

1  kkfej^teauS  klitB  :i4»Ph  tebi  .P 


XHIi  OI1SAPJ  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


20.  Him  let  us  call  putting  forth  the  ladle,  the  lumi¬ 
nous,  the  brilliant  in  light,  one  to  be  prayed  by  men, 
the  ancient  and  unaging  Fire. 

21.  For  the  mortal  who  performs  sacrifice  to  him  by 
his  gifts  of  the  offering  he  founds  much  increase  and  a 
glory  of  his  hero-strengths. 

22.  To  the  Fire,  the  ancient,  the  first  and  supreme, 
the  knower  of  all  things  born  in  the  sacrifices  with  the 
obeisance  comes  the  ladle  full  of  the  oblation. 

23.  May  we  offer  sacrifice  as  did  Vyashwa  with  these 
greatest  and  richest  thinkings  to  Fire,  the  brilliant  in 
light. 

24.  O  Rishi,  son  of  Vyashwa,  now  sing  the  word  of 
illumination  as  did  Sthurayupa,  to  the  Fire,  vast  in  his 
wideness,  the  dweller  in  the  house. 

25.  The  guest  of  men,  the  son  of  the  Trees,  the  illu¬ 
mined  seers  praise  for  his  protection,  the  ancient  Fire. 

26.  Turned  towards  all  the  great  beings,  turned 
towards  our  human  offerings,  by  our  obeisance,  O  Fire, 
thou  takest  thy  seat  on  the  sacred  grass. 

27.  Conquer  for  us  many  desirable  things,  take  pos¬ 
session  of  the  wealth  that  brings  us  our  many  longings 
and  hero-energy  and  the  offspring  and  the  glory. 

28. *  *  *  * 


*  Not  translated 


449 


llV,||  Jib  MU  IK  JttlfrS  I  :J^ltelta£-Kjt  lbtt  JJfctM  UtS 


iuii  Jit  tt  us  y±ii=±^  i  yb£iht  tjt  t£  t?aj±jj*t  uate 

llfell  ktfcjt  MM  4j±HJS±&  I  :lbtjgjfelftkfeat  lM|h  It  Ml 
nfeii  kthjt  tit  yiiiSii  i  ipuji>hiif,^kb.  ihititbi  mu^jp 

ll^ll  hthj.6  tit  JtflSil  I  StJfe  tMt  JbUi  JJfitbpfc  tl  %  tU£t 

£& 

:h£li£  BflMlti 

\. 

llo^U  UUMMtfe  Iteifit  ltltltUs 

i  It  linfrMkhj  Itus  tit  tb  tue 

lUkll  t^t  llUS  tUUbJlt  :tJi  ^Jtt 
I  ItiJJtJt^U  *t  feb  JbJlfeilS  '£}  Mb 

a  III;!  OIXSAXI  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 

29.  Thou  art  he  who  breaks  through,1  thou  openest 
to  us  the  luminous  impulsions;  open  to  us  the  conquest 
of  the  great  Riches,  O  Fire. 

30.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  glorious  one;  bring  to  us 
Varuna  and  Mitra,  the  all-rulers  who  possess  the  Truth 
and  have  the  purified  judgment. 


SHYAVASHWA  ATREYA 
Sukta  38 

1.  You  (two)  are  the  ritual-priests  of  the  sacrifice, 
conquerors  in  our  plenitudes  and  our  works;  to  this 
awake,  O  Indra,  O  Fire. 

2.  O  smiters  who  journey  in  the  chariot,  slayers  of  the 
coverer,  ever  unconquered — to  this  awake,  O  Indra, 
O  Fire. 

* 

3.  Men  have  pressed  out  for  you  by  the  stones  this 
rapturous  honey-wine — to  this  awake,  O  Indra,  O  Fire. 

4.  Take  pleasure  in  the  sacrifice,  for  the  sacrifice  come 
to  the  Soma  wine  pressed  out,  gods  to  whom  rises  the 
common  laud,  O  Indra,  O  Fire. 

5.  May  you  take  pleasure  in  these  Soma-pressings  by 
them  who  have  the  offering, — O  gods  come  to  us, 
O  Indra,  O  Fire. 


1  or,  be  who  overcomes, 


451 


win  m 

fc£l=J  i(  k  Sfeble  tfefebiJK: 


I  J23MJ2 

r 


^  ai& 


lloj  II  ^ho-kktTll>  Itw.112 


I  \hk 

V. 


lute 


ll'bll  hP^hh(ft  |^>ig^  1  :my^  iidfelifeb  XH£  Uhlfe  lteb 


II7II  KP^hhm  yiiiSil  1  isfel!  xLlfe  iatSlfeibS 


\m\  hP|hhi^  jtiigii  i  xit 


ll^ll  lit  Bt  IK  \kiiSil  I  hit  i^ia£  ifcJak  j^kfctolli  ikl 


anu  □IJLSAI'V  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


6.  May  you  take  pleasure  in  this  laud  of  mine,  this  path 
of  song,  O  gods,  come  to  us,  O  Indra,  O  Fire. 

7.  Come  for  the  drink  of  the  Soma  wine  with  the  gods 
who  arrive  at  dawn,  you  who  have  the  victor-riches,1 
O  Indra,  O  Fire. 

8.  Hear  the  call  of  the  Atris,  of  Shyavashwa2  pressing 
the  wine,  come  for  the  drinking  of  the  Soma,  O  Indra, 
O  Fire. 

9.  Thus  have  I  called  you  for  protection  as  the  wise  have 
ever  called  you,  for  the  drinking  of  the  Soma  (wine), 
O  Indra,  O  Fire. 

10.  I  choose  the  protection  of  Indra  and  the  Fire 
with  Saraswati  at  their  side,  for  whom  the  sacred  song 
breaks  into  light.3 


NABHAKA  KANWA 
Sukta  39 


1.  To  Fire  I  give  laud,  the  possessor  of  the  illumined 
word,  to  worship  the  Fire  with  the  speech  of  revelation; 
let  the  Fire  reveal  the  gods  to  us,  for  he  is  the  seer  who 
goes  on  his  embassy  between  the  two  worlds  in  the 
knowledge, — let  all  that  are  hostile  be  rent  asunder. 


1  or,  you  who  have  the  riches  which  are  for  the  victor,  or  the  true  riches, 

2  He  who  has  the  bay-horse 

a  or,  is  chanted. 


453 


Il^ll  .^0  tfch-»MP-»>»P  tPh^bP  jP§lb->  PjWh=  m9p>jfr  lb|Jf,bjjs  li  :J±tJK 
|  WbalhHIPIPH  bbP>jhlPlb^  IP^htjK: 


I|V)||  >^Ji±Ji±l9ihli  -teyiK  b  M^hUttJlMy£  Ik^fcSiS  H 

I  Llnhife  inbbXjPjslfthlfo  H 


llxli  m  Jt-ifeSfeJ  fci  Uih  fe^b  te  Ji  It&bHjf  Jte!£ 

I  tjimhi*  Lbblbb  hi.  UlbkijiiiiH 


llfell  '^b-'hiP^P  |Pb->bbj  |p%  ibm  :h-,h  mr£  b^  gj'bjbj  K  hbb  P 

i  JtyBUe  MIh  t  ak  a>  itti  tjUiiH  tile 


Mill  hB.  Xh>HlP*hP  i>kie^w4> 


I  1-HhhPl?  hPPib-b  uitat  fcibi 


3HM  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNJAIAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


2.  O  Fire,  destroy  with  a  new  word  the  expression  of 
these  within  in  the  bodies,  destroy  within  us  the  beings 
hostile  to  those  who  give  thee,  let  all  the  enemy  forces, 
the  hostile  spirits  depart  from  here  who  would  do  hurt 
to  us, — let  all  that  are  hostile  be  rent  asunder. 


3.  O  Fire,  to  thee  I  offer  my  thoughts  as  if  an  offering 
of  light1  cast  into  thy  mouth;  so  do  thou  awake  to  know¬ 
ledge  in  the  gods,  for  thou  art  the  ancient  and  benign 
messenger  of  the  Sun,— let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

4.  He  founds  growth  upon  growth  of  the  being  even  as 
one2  desires;  offered  the  oblation  of  offered  energy  for 
every  call  to  the  gods  he  founds  both  the  peace  and  the 

movement  of  the  Shining  Ones,  he  founds  the  bliss, _ 

let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 


5.  He  awakes  to  knowledge  by  his  forceful  and  many- 
sided  works;  he  is  the  priest  of  the  call  of  many  powers 
surrounded  by  lights  of  discernment  and  he  takes  posses¬ 
sion  of  all  that  faces  him,— let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent 
asunder. 

6.  The  Fire  knows  the  births  of  the  gods  and  the  secret 
thing  of  mortals;  this  is  the  Fire  that  gives  the  treasures, 
the  Fire  when  there  is  cast  into  him  as  offering  that 
is  new  uncovers  the  hidden  doors,— let  all  that  are  alien 
be  rent  asunder. 


1  gh{tam>  clarified  butter  or  light 
3  or,  he 


455 


nim±H 

<^PIP;P.W$  Pit  tttkijrlilltljt  tfej  2?lt  IP-PHS  ilSSi  t$ 
l  pp)>  ip^a  :t  £  tt  yiilSiS 

oft  Jfe& 


II Q ^ n  (+p  'Ph->PIP-‘kb  Itttti  t±}t  i}h  :t£i}h  ihlidtl 

I  pikj-pS  ith  t}^  tl  hhlle  tile  It  tl 


11^.11  l±t£ 

:^l2ihlt±ht  (P^>jh  :t§  list}  It  p°-PKhj  tattt  li  mfil.tyt.  t 

I  :t}ife  Ittt}  tjte  lbitlttj  lajltitijle 


non  pp  itlHtltiht  I22&  p >}nnp-j$fe-pSihit  tlihtj  h'lilht 
I  ttejfej  LfeitJ  }tte}  ittittit  :tijie  It 


lie\H  %titltij±t  U?pjt  Jatt  It p  tJtaS  t^H  titj h£  ibellfe  lit  t 

I  ltttJSJt  fet}  t  :£tt  ttttijle 


traiJ  DIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


7.  Fire  is  the  companion  dwelling  in  the  gods,  dwelling 
in  the  beings  who  are  masters  of  sacrifice;  he  increases  by 
his  rapture  many  seer-wisdoms,  even  as  all  that  is  large, 
he  is  a  god  in  the  gods  and  a  lord  of  sacrifice,  let  all  that 
are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

8.  Fire  is  the  sevenfold  human,  he  is  lodged  in  all  the 
rivers;  to  him  we  have  come,  the  dweller  in  the  triple 
abode,  the  Fire  of  the  thinker,  slayer  of  the  Destroyers, 
ancient  and  supreme  in  the  sacrifices, — let  all  that  are  alien 
be  rent  asunder. 

9.  Fire  is  the  seer  who  takes  up  his  dwelling  in  his  three 
abodes  of  knowledge  of  three  kinds;  may  he  sacrifice  to 
the  Three  and  Thirty  and  satisfy  us,  perfected,  the  illu¬ 
mined  thinker  and  messenger, — let  all  that  are  alien 
be  rent  asunder. 

10.  O  ancient  and  supreme  Fire,  thou  art  in  us  who  are 
mortals,  thou  in  the  gods,  one  and  sole  thou  rulest  over 
the  Treasures;  around  thee  the  wide-flowing  waters  go 
each  with  its  own  bridge, — let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent 
asunder. 


Sukta  40 

1 .  O  Indra,  O  Fire,  forceful  you  give  to  us  the  treasure 
by  which  we  shall  overcome  in  our  battles  even  all  that  is 
firm  and  strong,  as  Fire  the  trees  in  a  wind,— let  all 
that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 


457 


8St 


ll^ll  ik±klk±kk  kj  ln2±ki}k  kkk  MP.tt  kk 

I  kk±k  ltittHtojIt  k>J(jkk  Eklnl>.£  k£k  hjie 


I|V,||  i±k  ^KiP^kP  mMUjfi  kli£|  £& 

I 


blnkP-^bP-ik  Lb 
lojll^P  iS 


nxn 


i±k  ^kiP^kk  &k  ikkkj  bib'j^k  ika.h  :ys  kk}kl£  kk}kJk}}kk 

I  mg  im*fa  }kilP^Jfr»lHk  kk*ie 


ufen 

%h±hUkkk  ilk  kk?hk}k  k  kk}fta  iPikh-^-h  ^  ip^pj«»  b  ik 

I  :kttjk}te  }kLLSih}]lnllk  tak  %  lk 


llkll 

<£h±klkikk  kPIPhi^  Ifrkk  kPIPP'lb  Ifrkk  IPbfrbj  lb»>  :k  k 

I  klk  link  2ajyi2  ^kikk  kkpkksgkikkk  lk  %k 


SUM  OLLSAW  3HJL  OX  SiVIVAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


2.  May  we  not  shut  you  away  from  us,  then  may  we 
truly  worship  Indra  with  sacrifice,  the  god  most  potent 
of  the  gods;  may  he  sometime  come  to  us  with  the  war- 
horse,  may  he  come  to  us  for  the  winning  of  the  pleni¬ 
tudes,  for  the  winning  of  the  purity,1 — let  all  that  are 
alien  be  rent  asunder. 

3.  For  they,  Indra  and  Fire,  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
mellays;  gods,  seers,  questioned,  they  by  their  seerhood 
gain  for  one  who  seeks  their  friendship  the  knowledge 
won  by  the  thought, — let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

4.  To  Indra  and  the  Fire  sing  the  illumined  chant  even 
as  Nabhaka,  doing  them  homage  with  sacrifice  and 
speech,  whose  is  all  this  world  and  this  heaven  and  great 
earth  bear  for  them  in  their  lap  the  treasures, — let  all 
that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

5.  Even  as  Nabhaka  direct  towards  Indra  and  Fire 
the  Words  who  uncovered  the  sea  of  the  seven  foundations 
with  its  dim2  doors, — even  Indra  ruling  all  by  his  might, 
— let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

6.  Even  as  of  old  cleave  like  clustering  mass  of  a 
creeper,  crush  the  might  of  the  demon;  that  wealth 
amassed  by  him  may  we  by  Indra  share, — let  all  that  are 
alien  be  rent  asunder. 


1  or,  for  the  getting  of  sacrifices 
*  or,  oblique 


459 


09* 


nh.6\\  Hlln|h>  (bbb  falbi  b b  Hhihblh  i>nHl£  lb£lbfej 

I  PJIfet>fcP>&pfcPlh»k  (b(bfrbbhj  lb*blJ12±£b 


IlHlI  bb 

%tbbllbttb  :Ph^k  finals  IRnlte  bl(ls  fi  bj  t  p 

I  bbbijbblbib  bib  ibsbi  ItlJiLiJ  k 


no ^ u  (±b 

^HlPikU  (h>|Pfc>fcP  Pbjg  bjbit  bJIgftlh^lftaTfe  lb£(K  12  bbj  k  \k£. 

|  WfrkjPPlfcPP  ta^hJPtjfrS  my*ay  k 


ll'bll  (±b  frfphlP'hb  (bbj  (b  b±blb  b  lb  (feblbiHb  (bib 
I  :b->j$  h4b^j  (bfe  :hP4RK  bk(fe6  :hPlbh(g-»$ 


II7II  (lb 

^biblbbtb  iPP-ekMfe.»P  jbi  HLb  (bbiiy  P-jb  ipi^ppp  p>^>i^ 

l  :j*j£  b£.  bllbab  bbj  Ibblblgi  b  lb 


lie\ll  %bibibiltb  Ibbabb  bibbb  (bbibfc  hi^pip  bbbjbbji^lbiie 

l  iXbj  ikk  (bbl^bi  (±S  ibis  (bbbibjb 


3HH  DIXSA1V  3HX  OX  SNJVAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


7.  When,  O  Indra,  O  Fire,  these  who  are  here  call 
you  with  speech  and  act,  may  we  overcome  by  our  men 
those  who  battle  against  us,  may  we  conquer  those  who 
would  conquer  us, — let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

8.  White  gods  are  they  who  from  below  ascend  to  the 
heavens  by  their  lights;  according  to  the  law  of  the 
working  of  Indra  and  Fire,  flowing  move  the  Rivers 
whom  they  loosed  from  bondage  to  every  side, — let  all 
that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

9.  O  Indra,  O  thou  of  the  bright  horses,  O  begetter 
of  the  shining  hero,  the  shooter  who  strikes  into  his  mark, 
many  are  thy  measuring  of  things,  many  thy  expressions 
of  the  truth  which  accomplish1  our  thoughts, — let  all 
that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

10.  Intensify  him  by  your  purifications,  the  brilliant 
warrior  with  the  illumined  word,  even  him  who  with 
might  breaks  the  serpent-eggs  of  Shushna,  may  he  con¬ 
quer  the  waters  that  bear  the  light  of  the  Sun-world, 
— let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

11.  Intensify  him  who  is  perfect  in  the  rite  of  the  path, 
the  true  warrior  who  follows  the  law  of  the  Truth;  it  is 
he  who  observes,  who  breaks  the  serpent-eggs  of  Shushna, 
conquers  the  waters  that  bear  the  light  of  the  Sun-world, 
— let  all  that  are  alien  be  rent  asunder. 

12.  So  has  the  new  word  been  spoken  to  Indra  and  to 
Fire,  even  as  by  my  father,  by  Mandhata,  by  the  Angiras; 
protect  us  with  triple  peace,  may  we  be  masters  of  the 
riches. 

4  or,  bring  to  perfection 


a32 


461 


II7I1  HUi  Itfateh^ie  I  kfetellalsak  ihPjfrkKP  kt.Rji.^^j 


llfcll  hjmmm  ktLkb  l  ukjt>k-.fe»(hkl)k  PiPn$  mih- 


Hill  ij]i5  khktjie  I  :bmm  ^.ihK  :pfc>h  PjlPV  Hna$ 


nV,u  :kn%  tenji^hF-  i  :m£i  ntmitek  m  nii 


lull  :JabtlthJ>  ^Pfr  I  fejE  b£.  ip^pip  (PP^kh 


Hill  pjpip  ijiPiag-jfr  i  hi  tils  mmj  khi  hi 


llfcll  kPjWk  hjipp-  ME  i  totfej  ipppip  hhkhifi  i  nne 


II ^ II  Pi|  Plk\f>  :iii]  I  tppx'pp^p^ippi  til 

ka  && 

h"»b) 


3HIX  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNPMAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


VIRUPA  ANGIRASA 
Sukta  43 

1.  Him  pray  our  words,  even  these  lauds  of  Fire,  the 
illumined  seer,  the  creator,  invincible  in  his  sacrifice. 

2.  Such  art  thou  for  whom  I  bring  to  birth  perfect  laud 
and  glad  is  thy  response,  O  seeing  Fire,  O  knower  of  all 
things  born! 

3.  Oh,  like  jets  of  light  thy  keen  energies  of  flame 
devour  with  their  teeth  the  woods. 

4.  Bright,  with  smoke  for  their  flag  against  heaven, 
urged  by  the  winds,  labour  separate  thy  fires. 

5.  These  are  those  separate  fires  of  thine  that  kindled 
are  seen  like  rays  of  the  Dawns. 

6.  Black  is  the  dust  under  his  feet  in  the  march  of 
the  knower  of  all  things  born  when  Fire  sprouts  upon 
the  earth. 

7.  Making  his  foundation,  consuming  the  herbs  Fire 
wearies  not  but  goes  even  to  the  young  shoots. 


8.  Oh,  laying  all  low  with  his  tongues  of  flame,  flashing 
out  with  his  ray  Fire  shines  in  the  woodlands. 


463 


Il6\fcll  PltlfrS  kill  2aja  I  P^PJK  Mfeia  ^Si  ilh  tiLfei  H£ 


U'ilU  a  fe-Tbtfi  j±aa  ki  I  aafejlk  asiljjl  a&ila  :Mt  fejtie 


iiUii  WhHj(P^>^  am  i  ka&jla  ^  iij-t  aaia  aasaj  a  a 
iixin  jm-mja  a&a  im  i  aaa  aa  ausaj  asaj  matjK  am*  a> 


nUn  %Hia?h4>£jie  i  aim  ^sateLk  aa  aa 

nb.  ^  u  ^h(>!ftjhja  am  i  <a&aiaaa\l  aa  mwu  aa  aa 


unit  aaaaaaja^m  i  aaa  aisahma  amaaa  aa^rna 


mo^ii  am  jJUs  aiaaj  i  aaim  aau  jaaoaa  aa  aa  t^?- 


n'bii  :a£  ^it^a  aa  i  ^aa  a^ki^a  aaaaie 


a^IJ  0I1SAJM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 

9.  In  the  waters,  O  Fire,  is  thy  seat1,  thou  besiegest 
the  plants;  thou  becomest  a  child  in  the  womb  and 
art  born  again. 

10.  O  Fire,  that  ray  of  thine  fed  with  the  oblation  rises 
up  shining  from  the  offering  of  light2,  licking  the  mouth 
of  the  ladle. 

11.  May  we  ordain  sacrifice  with  the  lauds  to  Fire, 
the  ordainer  of  things,  Fire  who  makes  the  ox  and  the 
cow  his  food  and  he  bears  on  his  back  the  Soma  wine. 

12.  O  Fire,  we  come  to  thee  with  prostration  and  with 
the  fuel,  O  priest  of  the  call,  O  supreme  will! 

13.  O  pure  Flame,  fed  with  offerings  we  call  thee  as 
did  Bhrigu,  as  did  Manu,  as  did  Angiras. 

14.  For  thou  art  kindled,  O  Fire,  by  the  fire,  thou  who 
art  the  illumined  seer  art  kindled  by  one  who  is  illu¬ 
mined,  as  a  comrade  thou  art  kindled  by  thy  comrade. 

15.  So  do  thou  to  the  illumined  who  gives  to  thee 
give  the  thousandfold  wealth  and  the  hero-force. 

16.  O  Fire,  my  brother,  created  by  my  force,  drawn 
by  thy  red  horses,  pure  in  the  law  of  thy  workings,  take 
pleasure  in  this  laud  of  mine. 

17.  My  lauds  reach  thee,  O  Fire,  as  to  the  calf  lowing 
in  glad  response  the  cows  reach  their  stall. 

1  or,  goal, 

a  or,  clarified  butter, 


465 


99f 


it^it  Ijbjjs  p^pj  bue  i  lkfeifej  i±jmi  bib  hboi&h  kba 


UV>kll  bjblbblb  b  bilb  I  hblj  bbglb  b  hi±  Ph^hi^Pj  b^ie 


IIX^II  bbte  £  b  221fctbijie  I  bhhJlJnhb  &b3hbitbl±bU£ili  ilibj 


nfehn  :hS]  hbP^bq  bile  I  W»^Pib>  P»Pr.?ft  foifcl  bb  lbi  b 


(Ikhll  b»»»)ftfe  :b  hi  I  :bb  ^M£tbjbijs(bllle  b  baSSJJbb 


U&fcll  |blbl  lb2  fohb  I  :bb  ble  IbtbJ  mb)  bJ:B$feb  1)  lbb£ 


iiqXii  ^oo^b>iP\l  £jb  I  kibsie  bile  ipiP'P  bfejlb  h^hlEP  b 


ItUU  blbbikle  I  :bbSJbbj  ^Jnb^bhbjys  bijle 


ll?Jll  ^bjb  bihi*  bile  l  ikbL  :bbttj£  :ibSbJ  hbibi^ie  lb  b.-t£ 


3HIJ  OIXSAI-V  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 

18.  For  thee,  O  most  luminous  Angiras,  all  those 
worlds  of  happy  dwelling,  each  in  its  separate  power, 
labour  for  thy  desire,  O  Flame. 

19.  In  thinkers  the  wise,  the  illumined  seers  urged  by 
their  thoughts  the  Fire  to  dwell  in  their  house. 

20.  So  thee  as  the  horse  in  its  gallopings  performing 
the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  O  Fire,  they  desire  as  the  carrier 
of  the  offering  and  the  priest  of  the  call. 

21.  Thou  art  the  lord  who  looks  with  equal  eyes  on 
all  the  peoples  in  many  lands;  we  call  to  thee  in  our 
battles. 

22.  Pray  the  Fire  who  fed  with  the  pouring  of  the 
clarities  blazed  wide;  may  he  hear  this  our  call. 

23.  Such  art  thou  whom  we  call,  Fire,  the  knower  of 
all  things  born  who  hears  our  cry  and  smites  away  from 
us  the  foe. 

24.  I  pray  this  Fire,  the  marvellous  king  of  the  peoples 
who  presides  over  the  laws  of  their  action,  may  he  hear. 

25.  Fire  who  illumines  the  universal  life  like  a  male 
horse  urged  to  its  gallop,  we  speed  like  a  racer  to  the 
goal. 

26.  Smiting  away  the  foes  and  things  that  hurt,  burn¬ 
ing  the  Rakshasas,  on  every  side,  O  Fire,  shine  out  with 
thy  keen  flame. 


467 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


4  c3T  3FTRT  I  m  ^  444  4  3^:  IRV3II 


arm  fef^n  ^cgsn  *n  i  4  c^n  444fm|  ir<sii 


§*4  4et  4  5FTT  f 4  r^5^T:  gftTcm:  T43T  I  '=*44  IR^II 


4  4m  sm^ts^T  f4m  I  cim:  HTPT  |%I  ll^o|| 


srf^r  gtf44  5iK  i  ii3?n 


H  mr*4  f4mg:  Sm  c$4f  H  45*44:  I  5m  cT*r44f4s*I%  ||^^|| 


hh  %  srm 


c5?h  m  11341 


468 


MANDALA  EIGHT 

27.  Thou  whom  men  kindle  as  the  human  thinker1,  O 
most  luminous  Angiras,  O  Fire,  become  aware  of  my 
word. 

28.  Because,  O  Fire,  created  by  our  force  thou  art  the 
flame  born  in  heaven,  or  the  flame  born  in  the  waters,  as 
such  we  call  thee  with  our  words. 

29.  To  thee,  verily,  these  beings  born  and  these  worlds 
of  a  happy  dwelling  each  separately  in  its  place,  lay  a 
foundation  where  thou  canst  devour  thy  food.2 

30.  O  Fire,  may  we  be  those  who  have  the  right 
thought  and  the  divine  vision,  and  through  all  the  days, 
pass  safe  beyond  the  danger. 

31.  We  seek  with  rapturous  hearts  Fire,  the  rapturous, 
in  whom  are  many  things  that  are  dear  to  us, — Fire  with 
his  intense  and  purifying  light. 

32.  O  Fire,  shining  with  thy  light,  loosing  forth  thy 
lustre  like  the  sun  with  its  rays,  thou  puttest  forth  thy 
force  and  slayest  the  darknesses. 

33.  We  seek  from  thee,  O  forceful  Fire,  that  gift  of 
thine, — the  desirable  wealth  which  never  fails. 


1  or,  like  Manu, 

2  or,  cast  nourishment  for  thy  eating. 


469 


I?ll  ibfote  tt  tile  I  itJakltiltaB  IHltP-lvfepe  yiilkk 


H6MI  Uhtajhjt+ni.i>fr»ie  (  Pf]h?als  l^lbLltll  tiK 


ll^ll  ubte  £  b  po^httjle  1  hfitlttt}  khtjy  P^JHIIP^  2±k 


llVilt  :t  iha^  bile  l  Phi^  fc'ftlP-ltb  kh  ij^ie  ltl  b£ 


IUII 


d~>s  ui't-.Tfe  tile  I  i^plhthjk  :fckle  |P*£fe  ^  t£ 


ll^ll  Lie  it^i  I  %&  hkllbJtei*  tet  \lE  kl  tip® 


Hill  :b  .&£  tjiPfeft  bJK  I  lbk±l±  tblkibb  %  feiJQk  bjti  tile 


llilltt^  ibo^  tbipe  l  kfejiyittbjttt  btitl  tijlfeiyt 

aa  m 


a -au  dixsapm  am  ox  smwah 


MANDALA  EIGHT 
Sukta  44 

1.  Set  to  his  action  by  the  fuel,  awaken  the  guest  by 
the  offerings  of  the  clarities;  cast  in  him  the  offerings. 

2.  O  Fire,  take  pleasure  in  my  laud,  grow  by  this 
thought;  let  thy  joy  respond  to  our  utterances. 

3.  I  set  in  front  Fire,  the  messenger,  and  speak  to  the 
carrier  of  the  offerings;  may  he  bring  to  their  session 
here  the  gods. 

4.  O  luminous  Fire,  vast  and  bright  thy  rays  upwards 
ascend  as  thou  art  kindled  high. 


5.  O  joyful  Flame,  to  thee  may  my  ladles  go  bright 
with  the  clarities;  O  Fire,  take  pleasure  in  our  offerings. 

6.  I  pray  the  Fire,  the  rapturous  priest  of  the  call, 
the  sacrificant,  shining  with  his  light  rich  in  his  lustres, 
may  he  hear. 

7.  The  ancient  priest  of  the  call,  desirable  and 
accepted,  Fire  the  seer-will,  joiner  of  the  pilgrim-rites. 

8.  O  most  luminous  Angiras,  taking  pleasure  in  these 
offerings  lead  the  sacrifice  uninterruptedly  in  the  way 
of  the  Truth1,  O  Fire. 

1  or,  according  to  the  rule  of  the  rites, 


471 


II? Ju  MJW5  fete  lbi  lbjbi  I  biUtefelb  Ij  bibib  bMJ| 


tiffin  :t?pto|P|h*  bb  I  Hi|  bilsm  bblk  PPifrMS  bibb 

11^*  II  bjbiMJ  ito?  I  kble  ibabjb  :bjb  b&fe  :bbj  ibbbiji? 

llViill  6b  bbb£  bl  lUib  l  bjbbb  :bh  b|  lib  *bib  bijie  *b 
llxiUbjljb  Hyu  lbfe|  I  Ibfejys  ln%Ib  bihbiilbbiy  *b  b 

llfeill  ^babi  Mb  fcbiJK:  I  kbJ&jySibblb  bi£%i  tKPthfa  yM£ 
H U  bklh  >nKJ?j^j^fe  \  hl£±  Jkhih  kh±&  :ki}l£ 

HUH  b&ilb  :b2  b±pt}  I  b£  ha  bps  biib  ^ib  bj  bile 
lloiu  |h^t6ife  imhk?  i  Wfcbikbj  p^hb  pPhiiml  bbj 
11^,11  JttbM  b2b  bibibybj  I  lb  ill  bljfebls  bbb  b  bltebjb 


>IHIJ  OIXSAW  3H1  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


9.  High-kindled,  O  Right  and  True,  O  brilliant  light, 
awakened  to  knowledge  bring  here  the  divine  people. 

10.  The  illumined  seer  and  priest  of  the  call,  free  from 
harms,  shining  with  light,  carrying  his  banner  of  smoke, 
him  we  seek,  the  ray  of  intuition  of  the  sacrifices. 

11.  O  Fire,  made  by  our  force,  protect  us  against  the 
doers  of  harm,  pierce  the  hostile  power. 

12.  Fire  by  the  ancient  thought  making  beautiful  his 
own  body,  a  seer,  grows  by  each  illumined  sage. 

13.  I  call  to  me  the  Child  of  Energy,  Fire  of  the  puri¬ 
fying  light  in  this  sacrifice  which  is  perfect  rite  of  the 
path. 

14.  So  do  thou,  O  Fire,  O  friendly  light,  with  thy 
brilliant  flame  sit  with  the  gods  on  the  sacred  grass. 


15.  The  mortal  who  serves  the  divine  Fire  in  the  house 
of  the  body,  to  him  he  gives  the  Riches. 

16.  Fire  is  the  head  and  peak  of  heaven  and  lord  of 
earth  and  he  sets  moving  the  waters. 

17.  O  Fire,  upward  dart  blazing  thy  pure  and  brilliant 
tongues;  make  to  shine  out*  thy  lights. 

18.  Thou  art  the  lord  of  the  Sun- world,  O  Fire,  and 
hast  power  for  the  gifts  desirable;  may  I  who  laud  thee 
abide  in  thy  peace. 


473 


Il^kll  :PJ hih  .bijte  |  kih%ii£  frlfe&fej  Jfepfe  PjhtfeJ  hlhfc 


llV>ill  MJxlh  ^  I  :kte±hj  PhIPhft  £  hlPPPh  htte 


11x5:11  ^  hllrt  I  :6feiwy  h^riihife  ^JPJhfipfife 


llfekll  :hltjl$fe  itPP  ?■!>?■>  I  kite  itei  m  ife  tei  ^  p.Hlfri  ktih 

115:5:11  :h  tej^fe  fcihih  kite  I  l£>KPj  Ittete  Oh]  hit  JhtOte  Lhi  M£ 


11*5:11  :hllte  hfe4>  ^feli  l  :feja>  :fejls  :&fejfejls  :hPPPPJte  :k^te 


llo^ii  Mh  :hite  I  hah  :hh^  h4P$  IPteitetei  Mhaite 


llUlt  :iU)  *h  Itteh  itei  I  :hj£py  htjte^j  IPHInhJ^hh  hthlfej 


a -au  oixsapv  am  oi  snhah 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


19.  Thee,  O  Fire,  the  thinkers  urge  on  thy  road,  thee 
by  their  perceivings  of  knowledge;  may  our  words 
increase  thee. 

20.  We  choose  the  comradeship  of  the  Fire  inviolate 
in  the  law  of  his  nature,  the  ever- chanting  messenger. 


21.  Most  pure  in  his  workings  is  the  Fire,  he  is  the 
pure  illumined  sage,  the  pure  seer  of  Truth;  pure  he 
shines  out  fed  by  our  offerings. 

22.  So  thee  may  my  thinkings  and  my  words  increase 
always;  O  Fire,  awake  to  the  comradeship  between  us. 


23.  O  Fire,  if  I  wert  thou  and  thou  wert  I,  then  would 
thy  longings  here  become  true. 

24.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  shining  one,  shining  with  thy 
lustres  lord  of  the  shining  riches;  may  we  abide  in  thy 
right  thinking1. 

25.  O  Fire,  to  thee  holding  firmly  the  law  of  thy 
workings,  move  my  words  like  lowing  cattle,  as  rivers  move 
towards  the  sea. 

26.  Fire  the  youth,  the  lord  of  the  peoples,  the  seer, 
the  all-consuming,  Fire  of  the  many  illuminations  I 
glorify  with  my  thoughts. 


1  or,  thy  grace. 


475 


Ilhn  bbefi  bbb 

I  ^tobbXbibJb  :>:fejle  Jbk  :blb  lbi  Ij  L£i'±te 


lU II  sakjb  jbbabj^  IbbJS  Ebhhlb;>  US 

I  |b\kb  Itb  jtib^bJHj&lb  lie  bile 

:MMiS  Ijjtirt 


llo^li  ibj  U±bfclle  kb  I  %2fe  :hAKlt  li£  :bftgfcjl  billS 


bJE  HJbb\b  bile  I  Jbb  :bjLtlk  b  Ibbl  bbkbill  UIJs 


ll?ill  b2b  ibbih  bib  I  bbb  Sit  lbljk  jyie  ^  kibble 


m'HW  bbtlbbijbjbi  I  %22Jb  biltikhibj  bb  bai  Iblfeb 


3^13  OIXSAJV  3 Hi  OX  SMIVAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


27.  May  we  strive  towards  the  Fire  by  our  lauds,  the 
charioteer  of  the  sacrifices,  Fire  with  his  solid  strength, 
his  sharp  tusks  of  flame. 

28.  May  this  thy  worshipper,  O  Fire,  abide  in  thee; 
on  him  have  grace,  O  Right  and  True,  O  purifying 
Flame. 

29.  For  thou  art  the  wise  thinker  seated  in  the  house, 
like  an  illumined  sage  ever  awake;  O  Fire,  thou  shinest 
out  in  heaven. 

30.  Before  the  stumblings  come,  O  Fire,  before  the 
spoilers  arrive,  O  seer,  carry  forward  our  life,  O  Shining 
One. 


BHARGA  PRAGATHA 
SUKTA  60 

1.  Come,  O  Fire,  with  thy  fires,  we  choose  thee  as  the 
priest  of  the  call,  may  the  ladles  extended,  full  of  the 
offering  anoint  thee,  strongest  for  sacrifice  when  thou 
sittest  on  the  sacrificial  seat. 

2.  For,  towards  thee,  O  Son  of  force,  O  Angiras,  the 
ladles  move  in  the  rite  of  the  path;  we  seek  the  child  of 
Energy  with  his  hair  of  light,  the  supreme  fire  in  the 
sacrifices. 


a33 


477 


m 

ifbii  Ijih  %ih 

I  JLhh^gJ  felllh  ltfefeh  tile  jfe  Ijlh 


w?ll  :jtybJh  %lh  fcgafej-ftfejlaj >, m%jte&ls 

I  :h±i±  Miiiit3lli  fefeijiSX  fe^feli  Jfe  lit 


iisui  %t±%  fe5ib  itikl  Lfeiiiie  ^ttbjti}  ifeh 
I  hji&  HJbleH  tihUtHak  fefej  ibb 


lUll  :fcfeifei  :£babia  :fei&  lit  hh.  febia  Ifelfc^ 
l  ajle  life  bjfei  feiii  JJ2±±  lifej  Bpyjfe  satjlii  11241s 


iiViii  tijmim  ue  biyu  tLt.hjt  mtsfej  ist 

I  tejaafefepifc  u>MK  LbJiii  fehjfei 


IUII  :fe^hjfejjb  feifeih  %fe  IBb  ifefejS  lijibis  Itjle 
I  btib  &l*te  lfe£  K<P^jh  mtUK 


llfell  ids  rbjbfej  IfcSdfesqfeale  l£ib 

I  :i2*l2  *fc>ih  ipi&  Pjtf  ifetefepb  tils 


a^IJ  DIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


3.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  seer  and  the  ordainer,  the 
priest  of  the  call,  the  purifier  to  whom  must  be  given 
sacrifice,  rapturous,  strong  for  sacrifice,  one  to  be  prayed 
in  the  pilgrim-rites  with  illumined  thoughts,  O  brilliant 
Flame! 

4.  Bring  to  me  who  betray  not,  O  youngest,  O 
unceasing  Flame,  the  gods  that  desire  for  the  advent; 
come  to  our  well-founded  pleasant  things,  O  shining 
One,  rejoice  established  by  our  thinkings. 

5.  O  Fire,  O  deliverer,  thou  art  very  wide,  the  true, 
the  seer,  thou  who  shinest  out,  O  high-kindled  Fire,  thee 
the  sages,  the  ordainers  illumine. 

6.  Flame  out,  O  most  luminous  Flame,  shine  out  for 
man,  give  to  him  who  lauds  thee  the  bliss,  for  thou  art 
great;  may  my  luminous  seers  abide  in  the  peace  of  the 
gods,  high  in  fire  may  they  overcome  the  foe. 

7.  As,  O  Fire,  thou  consumest  old  dry  wood  on  the 
earth  so  burn,  O  friendly  Light,  whosoever  comes  with 
evil-mind,  our  hurter. 

8.  Deliver  us  not  to  the  mortal  foe,  to  the  demoniac, 
to  him  who  gives  expression  to  evil;  guard  us  with  thy 
unfailing  and  benignant,  guardian  and  rescuer  fires,  O 
ever-youthful  Flame! 

9.  Guard,  O  Fire,  with  the  single  word,  guard  with 
the  second,  guard  with  the  words  that  are  three,  O 
master  of  Energies;  O  shining  One,  guard  with  the 
fourth. 


479 


08* 


H^ill  kjte  Ikte  2akJ  tills  lkkjllS  kj  lkhk  a]h&khj 
I  bkMkklkfi  kisiki  ^^hip^>ip|5  Mat 


llV>ill  tj]j-i>  ttjliE  kilakjl  p]£p  i pok  i5itie 

I  £fe ±&  k^kH  lkl  t  :iah  kkk  MS 


llxill  k£  Jklk  Ik  Ukk  kj<laiy£  klfi  :k^  ^  k  H 
l  lisakjljk  |kik±k  kkkjis  kkk  kite  k  Ijk 


llfeill  :Ik  IkM  :kite£  kkkjls  k  *kkl  kite  lteikj 
I  kteakjk  MJk  ikgikk  Ikkk  JkllSlSJ 


Ufcjn  :kjy6k  JteteJ  lfeitej  *kkJklS  l&feJS  tek  *k  tel  k 

I  :iskjlte  tie  Ikiikikkls  Sikkh  pipp  kk 


Hi  ill  K>P-HSl?k*  4k^k£  ikikS  jllkhk  k  te  lk»> 
I  kteUS  ifeklh  kp.  tete^tek  kite  Jk  lie 


no i n  kb  |tmk  hjiie  kkikk^  sakjt  frjpjit^ 

I  tes^k  kklk  h±  K  ijuMlte  JktekiklkSkJ  ^lh 


HUM  OIXSAM  3HX  OX  SMAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


10.  Guard  us  from  every  hostile  demon,  protect  us  in 
the  plenitudes;  for  we  come  to  thee  as  the  closest  of  the 
gods  and  our  ally  for  our  increase. 

11.  O  purifying  Fire,  bring  to  us  and  give  a  wealth 
that  increases  our  growth,  the  wealth  that  has  to  be 
expressed  in  us,  O  measurer  of  our  formations,  by  thy 
right  leading  a  wealth  full  of  many  longed-for  things  and 
very  great  in  its  self-glory, — 

12.  By  which  we  may  conquer  those  who  challenge 
us  in  our  batdes,  breaking  through  the  designs  of  the 
foe;  so  do  thou  increase  us  with  thy  delight,  O  luminous 
in  might,  speed  on  their  way  the  thoughts  that  find 
the  treasure. 

13.  Fire  is  like  a  bull  that  sharpens  its  horns  and 
tosses  its  head,  his  flaming  jaws  are  too  bright  and  keen 
to  gaze  at;  strong- tusked  is  the  Son  of  force. 

14.  O  Fire,  O  Bull,  thy  tusks  of  flame  cannot  be 
challenged  by  the  gaze  when  thou  rangest  abroad;  so 
do  thou,  O  priest  of  the  call,  make  that  our  offering  is 
well  cast,  conquer  for  us  many  desirable  things. 

15.  In  the  forest  thou  sleepest  in  the  two  mothers, 
mortals  kindle  thee  into  a  blaze;  then  sleepless  thou 
earnest  the  offerings  of  the  giver  of  the  oblation  and  now 
thou  shines t  in  the  gods. 

16.  Thee  pray  the  seven  priests  of  the  call,  thee  the 
unhesitant,  shooting  well  thy  shafts ;  thou  breakest 
asunder  the  hill  with  thy  heat  and  thy  light:  O  Fire,  go 
forth  beyond  men. 


481 


Ilbll  klklhtt  bjfehjl^  I  Plt^hKJ  :k  ftta>(h  :h-»h  ^JU 


Mill  tehih  <11%  k£  I  :jblte  UrtKkJ  iyih  :bjjlb  kite  Jfa  hi 

'//;■  aa 


Mobil  tkteijtel  kibkte 
I  kikteLti&piEllQ  lb  ^bmaMsys^  lte  tel  JJ±  lb 


Ml  ill  bjte  llbiyh^Ii  fclkbJJJste 

I  :btel  kk  ^bibPikJhiiykiJte  kite 


II?iMbkb£akjk  telk  lb  ibhiilS  :k  ihhs&Z 
I  lkkisfejfcj  b-tE  btkfthllaS  phis  k£% 


lie\jM  blk\lafrfe  lik^ssifeajkkite  :pi?kp$j  p>]k- 
I  :.bljkkkk  btl  liKJte  lh  bijbkijte 


3  >113  OIJ.SAkI  3H1  OJL  SNIA1AH 


MaNdala  eight 


17.  The  Fire,  the  fire,  let  us  call  for  you  having  placed 
the  sacred  grass  and  placed  the  gifts  of  our  pleasure,  on 
day  after  day,  Fire  of  the  unseizable  ray,  priest  of  the 
call  of  seeing  men. 

18.  O  Fire,  to  thee  constant  in  the  peace  of  a  deep  calm 
I  come  with  the  intuition  that  awakes  to  knowledge; 
by  our  impulsion  bring  to  us  for  our  protection  wealth 
of  many  forms  that  is  most  close. 

19.  O  Fire,  O  god,  for  thy  adorer  thou  art  the  lord  of 
creatures,  thou  art  the  master  of  his  house  who  departs 
not  from  him,  afflicting  the  demons;  great  art  thou, 
the  guardian  of  heaven  who  comes  to  his  gated  home. 

20.  O  blazing  light,  let  not  the  demon  enter  into  us; 
let  not  the  witchcraft  of  the  goblin  sorcerers  take  pos¬ 
session;  O  Fire,  push  calamity  and  hunger  far  beyond 
the  pastures  of  our  herds,  ward  the  demon-possessed 
away  from  us. 


PURUMILHA  AND  OTHERS 
SUKTA  71 

1.  O  Fire,  guard  us  by  thy  lights1  from  every  hostile 
force  and  from  mortal  foe. 

2.  O  beloved  in  thy  birth,  mortal  wrath  has  no  power 
over  you:  thou  art  master  of  the  nights. 


1  or,  by  thy  greatnesses 


483 


I 


m 

uUi<  iijfej  y±Ji5ii±  iajl  ibajpa  jaasa  m  m2j 
l  kinjblte  mme  jala  p  bipe 

llo^ll  IrPhP-UtKbE  hisMi  iphp  U±l£b  l£sa? 
I  aaas  Ikb  paj  jafejysiys  :k  liable 

ll^ll  :iapps  Uib  Mt  I  tapjltHhH  jjtiwilh  h£  kkk  lb  a 
H?ll  Muftb  i  Hip  ip^hpjh  y^jia  kii e 

II6MI  ftjPh  fcaiii  I  :^HJJ£  (jurnit  li  lib  link  iircfrfr 

U^H  fible  Jitlfe  at  ya  IS  I  niPh  MSli  feih^fekS  tojl  kk 

l|V)ll  Ubli  pt  .Uilbb  a  I  izlbh  ijjlpj  waiPiahfr  kpj  kk  k 

iixii  amptiE  jiMb  a  i  a±bb  aa  \hPi>n>  p>hp  a 

IlfeU  Itilppifpj  ip  bp.  I  Plhh  l^ttJkPHJ^kJ  Ik  H 


HUH  OIXSAW  3  HA  OA  SNKAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


3.  So  do  thou  with  all  the  gods,  O  child  of  Energy, 
O  happy  light,  give  us  the  wealth  in  which  are  all  boons. 

4.  The  hostile  forces,  O  Fire,  cannot  divorce  from  the 
Riches  the  mortal  giver  whom  thou  rescuest. 

5.  O  Fire,  O  illumined  seer,  he  whom  thou  in  the 
winning  of  the  purity  speedest  towards  the  Riches,  by 
thy  protection  reaches  among  the  Ray-Cows. 

6.  Thou  bringest,  O  Fire,  the  wealth  in  which  are  the 
many  strengths  to  the  mortal  giver;  lead  us  towards 
greater  riches. 

7.  Protect  us,  deliver  us  not,  O  knower  of  all  things 
born,  to  the  mortal,  the  evil-thoughted  who  would 
bring  on  us  calamity. 

8.  O  Fire,  let  none  undivine  take  away  from  us  what 
was  given  by  thee,  the  divine;  thou  hast  power  over 
the  riches. 

9.  Thou  art  the  measurer  to  us,  thy  adorers  of  a  mighty 
wealth,  O  child  of  Energy,  O  Friend,  O  shining  One. 

10.  May  our  words  go  towards  thee  with  thy  keen  light 
and  thy  vision,  our  sacrifice  to  thee  with  surrender  for 
our  protection,  thee  the  widely  proclaimed,  the  master 
of  many  riches, — 

11.  To  the  Fire,  the  Son  of  force,  the  knower  of  all 
things  born,  for  the  gift  of  our  desirable  things;  twofold 
he  becomes  the  immortal  in  the  mortals,  the  rapturous 
priest  of  the  call  in  man. 


485 


98* 


llfell  hhsm  Jttiie  Uulhil  I  JBjmmt  tefeAkkitJ  tj 


lUll  kmiteJs  Mte  iSfej  l  :k£  lkfeatnfriEjl 


b6\ 

:MMJS  <kt& 

O 

nVi^  n  H)ir.b>-&4S^R  j.srJ  Slfefebj 

i  is  mjmkynL  jk  m^b  m^te 


tix^u  :ijs  m=i£  Jdijsj^i;  m»  B2^i±ii£  mi  mite 
i  kotejiteiite  :itjiteib  ^mm^jibmjte 


life  in  khmi  km  ms  mm  m^te 

i  kjLjijmfe  m  te|  k  &igfe  mm  imymjis 


itfc&tigbi&  mtete  mimbitmjkkms  mb  mite 
i  immms  mjsim2£m^  y»  mjte 


PM  0I1SAK  3 Hi  Ol  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


12.  Fire  for  you  by  the  worship  to  the  gods,  Fire  in  the 
journeying  of  the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  Fire  in  the  thoughts 
first  and  chief,  Fire  in  the  war-horse,  Fire  for  perfection 
in  our  field. 

13.  May  the  Fire  give  us  force  in  his  comradeship,  he 
who  has  power  for  the  desirable  things;  Fire  we  seek 
continually  in  the  son  of  our  begettings  as  the  shining 
one  and  the  guardian  of  the  body. 

14.  Pray  with  your  chants  Fire  of  the  keen  flame  for 
the  protection,  O  Purumilha!  Fire  for  the  Treasure, — 
the  Fire  men  pray  for  the  inspired  knowledge,  a  house 
for  a  splendid  light. 

15.  Fire  we  hymn  with  our  words  that  he  may  remove 
from  us  the  hostile  power,  Fire  to  give  to  us  the  peace 
and  the  movement;  he  is  in  all  men  like  a  protector  to 
whom  they  may  call,  he  is  the  daylight  of  the  wise. 


HARYATA  PRAGATHA 
Sukta  72 

1.  Do  you  make  the  offering,  the  priest  of  the  pilgrim- 
rite  has  come  and  he  conquers  again,  for  he  knows  the 
commandment  of  the  Fire. 

2.  Let  him  sit  within  close  to  the  keen  burning  ray 
the  priest  of  the  call  in  thinking  man  accepting  the 
comradeship  of  the  Fire. 


487 


88* 


teafeie  I  isit  a&ajii}  yisittjiitttle 

ll^ll  £iai|.  IfeJii  I  ijih^feb  aftlftps  ikoSifeJsy  ±}h 

ll?ll  lalktej  itsa  I  P^ha.^kif.1^  :&tl  kfeifefejitJlSfe  lie 
1IG\II  fcjiyjiii}  feja  «  :H1£B  Jfesh  15  hhlfrftli  HijlS 
llfell  1555  iiitel  U±li  I  tteysfeifeiS^itiii  td£i  yi£ 

hXii  kbsiie  pp|p*  pie  i  tSiiy  a  mpipm  kyi£k  kx& 

llxll  Slai  I  kk§Skie  lfejltl&fe  ypypfetlfe 

ii fell  kan  ltlltej  HijiLAb  i  maiaa  lih  5k  aa  a  aygakjaae 


aHIJ  DIXSAW  3HA  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


3.  Within  they  wish  him  to  be  in  a  man  the  “terrible 
one”,  beyond  the  thinking  mind;  by  his  tongue  they 
seize  the  peace. 

4.  High  burnt  the  companion  bow,  a  founder  of  the 
growth  he  climbed  to  woodland,  he  smote  the  rock  with 
his  tongue. 

5.  He  is  the  shining  calf  who  wanders  and  finds  none 
to  bind  him  here,  to  one  who  lauds  him  he  manifests 
the  mother.1 

6.  And  now  is  the  great  and  vast  yoking  as  if  of  the 
Horse,  the  rope  of  the  chariot  is  seen. 

7.  Seven  milk  the  one,  two  let  loose  the  five  at  the 
ford  of  the  River  upon  the  cry  of  the  waters. 

8.  By  the  ten  of  the  sun  Indra  made  fall  the  covering 
sheath  of  heaven  with  his  triple  mallet. 

9.  A  new  adoration  moves  round  the  triple  pilgrim- 
sacrifice,  the  priests  of  the  call  anoint  with  the  honey 
wine. 

10.  With  surrender  they  pour  out  the  inexhaustible 
pervading  well  whose  wheel  is  on  high  and  its  opening 
below. 

11.  Close  by  are  the  stones  and  the  honey  wine  is 
poured  in  the  lotus  in  the  discharging  of  the  well. 


1  or,  for  one  who  lauds  him  he  goes  to  the  mother. 


489 


Hill  :JttJh±l±  i&hk  b£i  :bb  bl  Jb 
I  hHKJkS  :H±bblb  fejbjle  Jb  yfeb^lfebj 

86N 

:hhl&  hkhiit 


ll?ill  pppu^pj  iia  ijh  I  itbilfeb}  bibbk  bh  kb  bibi  Jb£ 


U6\^  U  ktebft  billlbb  1^5  ite  i&  ibb^tokblbkj  Mii|H 
H^ill  bob  b>bfe  I  :ijh^bbib  kkbJi^bbibJ  bbble 


llVj^ll  :bi  :bb  ip>>?  £ii  I  bjbj  lakfe  P-bnil  :bbab  b^b&  b£ 

llxill  :kjkjlb  p^pp  y?JiJ  I  :kjbli±  k  j&l Bik  k  bfejbbi  bbllb  £ 


life  ill  khbb  bysib  lbi  I  kbJ&JltJUbibJi  bbsj  bfesbj  be 


llhill  ibbaikj  iJaife  lk£  I  Jblkfc  bibb  J&k  jiblbfelhb  bib 


3>IIJ  OI.LSAK  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


< 


MANDALA  EIGHT 

12.  O  Ray-Cows,  come  to  the  well;  here  is  the  great 
wine-jar  of  the  sacrifice,  here  are  both  the  golden  handles. 

13.  Pour  into  the  wine  that  is  pressed,  a  joining  splen¬ 
dour,  the  glory  of  earth  and  heaven;  by  the  juice  of  the 
wine  sustain  the  Bull. 

14.  They  know  their  own  home;  like  calves  with  their 
mothers  they  met  with  each  other  as  companions. 

15.  In  the  jaws  of  the  eater  they  made  their  foundation 
in  heaven,  their  prostrations  of  surrender  to  Indra  and 
the  Fire  made  the  Sun-world. 

16.  The  warrior  milked  out  the  seven-planed  nourish¬ 
ing  force  and  energy  by  the  seven  rays  of  the  sun. 

17.  O  Mitra  and  Varuna,  in  the  rising  of  the  moon  he 
received  it  on  the  sun ;  it  is  the  healing  draught  for  him 
who  suffers. 

18.  And  now  let  him  stretch1  out  with  his  tongue  of 
flame  around  heaven  that  plane  of  him  in  his  full  delight 
which  is  to  be  laid  as  a  foundation. 


GOPAVANA  ATREYA 
Sukta  74 

1 .  All  kinds  of  beings  replenish  the  guest  domiciled  in 
your  house  in  whom  are  the  many  pleasant  things ;  I  laud 
him  with  my  thoughts  with  the  word  of  bliss. 


1  or,  orm 


491 


I  :a&  ajais  ajhl^a  IB 


u?u  »=>•»*>>>  laa  i  my  iaa  isaya  mais  ma  ^  la 

itesn  aajiam 

Vucm^fo  piun?>  £±a  i  mhimma  mxaja  jaam  ^  a£ 
n^n  •b.w.uh  (mai^k  i  jys^i  urn  a  *aiaa 

nvu  akyaaakaa  i  aaaa  ajiatniaj  aa%am  aks 


lIXll  mb 

*^n>  ]»>)»££>  am  i 


aaiBaa  a±aus 


iifen  bj^j»>^ii7^  i  iporpipa^  *a  irnyaa  aia±b 


iiiii  :ajayaa  jya&a  ikySixaia  a  ay  yaaayli  yarn  a 


a'HIJ  OIXSAK  3HX  OX  SKWAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


2.  He  to  whom  men  bringing  the  offering  pour  the 
stream  of  the  libation  and  by  their  word  that  give  expres¬ 
sion  to  him  proclaim  as  the  friend, — 

3.  The  wonderful,1  the  knower  of  all  things  born,  who  in 
the  formation  of  the  godheads  sends  up  the  offerings 
uplifted  in  heaven, — 

4.  We  have  come  to  the  Fire,  strongest  to  slay  the 
Coverers,  eldest  and  ever  new  in  whose  force  of  flame 
Shrutarvana,  son  of  Riksha,  grows  to  vastness. 

5.  The  immortal,  the  knower  of  all  things  born  who  is 
seen2  across  the  darkness,  one  to  be  prayed  to,  one  to  whom 
are  offered  the  clarities. 

6.  The  Fire  whom  men  here  oppressed  pray  with  their 
offerings  casting  their  libations  with  the  ladles  at  work.3 

7.  Thine,  O  Fire,  is  the  new  thought  founded  in  us,  O 
rapturous  and  well-born  guest,  strong  of  will,  wise  and 
powerful  for  action. 

8.  May  that  thought,  O  Fire,  become  pleasant  and 
full  of  peace  and  gladness;  grow  by  it,  well-affirmed  by 
our  lauds. 

9.  May  it  be  luminous  with  many  lights,  and  uphold 
in  its  inspiration  a  vast  inspired  knowledge  in  the  piercing 
of  the  Coverers. 


1  or,  the  great  doer, 

2  or,  who  sees 

3  or,  with  outstretched  ladles. 


a34 


493 


llViilltbib  PTjN9-)Ejic  :lftlftft£is  ibifctb 
I  ttliftjft  ftbnaith  ftjftlh  ^  Pftjt-bi* 


nxili  ksXiI  a.  yife  kttft  yiK  bjie  *mbi6 
I  la^gatejl^  :bl£lie  ii± 


llfc  H\  hjlnfift  ibUS  imt  lfebjbfeii  ftiblftlS 
l  ftjbabh  lnJteJite  j&iie  blftl.  lie 


Ilfc&M  b£bb  bjlb  & 
I  hftlftHMft  Jblbii  ^22|  mbit  JLfti  b 


UUll  Hbl  ibblh  Jti 
I  :>-^Jie  hifeaabjfe  lib)  jb  ft  blit  lbl  b 


t|o ^ H  :ft?y£  ft:  ftibftib  ftftft  bjiftte  bib 
1  kftjbib  k  libjbfel  iiSbi  lb  ftttJftSK: 


3313  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNNAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


10.  He  is  the  Horse  of  power  and  the  Cow  of  light,  it  is 
he  who  fills  our  chariots,  he  is  brilliant  and  like  Indra 
the  lord  of  beings;  you  shall  cross  through  his  inspiration, 
O  men!  and  find  each  wonderful. 

11.  Thou  whom  Gopavana  gladdens  with  his  word, 
O  Fire,  O  Angiras,  O  purifying  Flame,  hear  his  call. 

12.  Thou  whom  men  oppressed  pray  for  the  winning 
of  the  plenitudes,  awake  in  the  piercing  of  the  Coverers. 

13.  As  if  calling  armed  forces  in  Shrutarvana,  son  of 
Riksha,  from  whom  drips  the  rapturous  inspiration,  I 
comb  the  shaggy-maned  head  of  the  four. 

14.  Me  the  swift  and  galloping  four  of  that  most  strong 
one,  well-charioted,  bore1  towards  the  delight  as  if  birds 
flying  to  water.2 

15.  O  great  river  Parushni,  I  have  marked  out  (with 
them)  thy  true  course.  O  waters,  than  this  most  strong  one 
no  mortal  man  is  a  greater  giver  of  the  Horses  of  power.3 


1  or.  let  them  bear  me 

2  or,  as  the  birds  carried  Tugriva. 

3  Note  on  Riks  13,  14  and  15: 

As  is  shown  by  the  “Shravansi”  “Turvatha”  and  the  name  “Shrutarvana” 
— ihe  Rishi  is  giving  a  symbolic  turn  to  the  name  as  well  as  to  the  horses 
and  the  waters. 


495 


96t 


llftll  laiU  injb  I  :telftfeifelh>.Htemkte  Jais.fcij  h± 

ll^ll  Wpfofc  p-tMfc  Jnak  I  ittbikj  hj>Pj  imp  PiakjhPP  H4P 
llVill  :,>:£]hteja  JteJkk  I  :kj%Ik  kitekSSlfek  Jkhltiyte  k 

11*11  Wiin(h>  U5h  I  :PjhjkPjig  ni» ip  mtfjkii  :kyj±fcte 

llfell  :JeIt  ikLtiit  l  pglp.fafe  .&2ifejl2J2  1  fei 

llfcll  J&J>1  Valis.  Iksljte  I  :>?^pj  mife  1  Sate  ikk  kk  ik  k£ 

lUll  :tiB  :ip&  kj  I  ki)U>.i  kite  Lteite  ikkik^  %  IteSk 

V,S\  Jfelt 

SHU  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


VIRUPA  ANGIRASA 

Sukta  75 

1.  O  Fire,  yoke  like  a  charioteer  the  horses  most 
powerful  for  the  calling  of  the  gods;  take  thy  seat,  O 
ancient  priest  of  the  call! 

2.  And  now,  since  thou  hast  the  knowledge,  speak  for 
us  towards  the  gods,  make  true  to  our  aspiration  all 
desirable  things. 

3.  For  thou,  O  Fire,  O  most  youthful  son  of  force, 
thou  in  whom  are  cast  the  offerings,  art  the  possessor 
of  the  Truth  to  be  worshipped  with  sacrifice. 

4.  This  Fire  is  the  lord  of  the  hundredfold  and  thou¬ 
sandfold  plenitude,  the  seer  who  is  the  head  of  the 
treasures. 

5.  O  Angiras,  by  words  which  bear  in  them  the 
invocation,  bring  down  nearer  that  sacrifice  as  the 
heaven’s  craftsmen  brought  down  the  rim  of  the  wheel. 

6.  To  him  now,  O  Virupa,  by  the  eternal  word  give 
the  impulse  of  the  high  laud  to  the  luminous  Bull. 

7.  By  the  army  of  the  Fire  who  has  the  eye  that  sees 
from  afar1  may  we  lay  low  whatever  miser  Trafficker 
and  enter  among  the  shining  herds. 


1  or,  who  has  the  eye  of  wisdom 


497 


1 


8.6* 


life  ill  |ky±k±£  k  Jtefc  I  :kfelfe.fe£hj  WHIrfe  li£  k  likfej 


nViili  feie  ix  hijkkkfe  l  Ik  ibAie  i>fes|Pfck  fcjie  Mtb 


llg  ^  II  Pjplfrfekjfrfr  id  life 


life  ill  :fe«gfekB>  iii  Jfefe  I  ikhz'k  g^fetity.  kjkfel  ife±jjaihfeiie 


llUll  feife  feji  k  ltfek  I  lfeJfekXJkife  life  kfedlk  kkiJK:  *k  lit 


llUll  kjifoln  fel&fek  l  kfeji  Jkfejfek  bis.fe£afejJi  Jk  &  kfejil 


Ho ^ It  fefeUfehpMs  I  :fe2a£  feX  i^jinfe  kkm  kke  feihfe 
llfell  klj3fe  Ikfeik  kkjg  I  |M^b  :k2£  Jtkkk  :k  lit 


||?ll  :lJ&iai&l£  k  &&  I  UJ^feiJlklkiK  :iSkJ  lkifei  ^k  Ik 


a'HM  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MAN D ALA  EIGHT 


8.  May  the  peoples  of  the  gods  abandon  us  not,  even 
as  the  unslayable  luminous  herds  full  of  milk  leave  not 
a  calf  that  is  lean. 

9.  Let  not  calamity  from  every  evil-thoughted  hostile 
around  smite  us  like  a  billow  smiting  a  ship. 

10.  O  divine  Fire,  men  declare  their  prostration  of 
surrender  to  thee  that  they  may  have  force;  crush  by 
thy  might  the  foe. 

1 1 .  Once  and  again  for  our  search  for  the  Ray-Cow 
thou  hast  entered  wholly  into  the  riches,  O  Fire;  O 
maker  of  wideness,  make  for  us  a  wideness. 

12.  Abandon  us  not  in  the  winning  of  this  great  wealth 
as  if  one  who  bears  a  heavy  burden ;  conquer  this  massed 
treasure. 

13.  O  Fire,  may  this  mischief  cling  to  another  than 
us  for  his  terror;  increase  for  us  a  forceful  might. 

14.  The  man  in  whose  work  he  takes  pleasure,  one 
who  offers  the  prostration  of  surrender  and  is  not  poor 
in  sacrifice,  him  the  Fire  protects  with  increase. 

15.  From  thy  place  in  the  supreme  region  break 
through,1  to  those  who  are  below;  here  where  I  am,  them 
protect. 

16.  For  we  know  from  of  old  of  thy  protection  like 
a  father’s,  O  Fire,  now  we  seek  thy  bliss. 


1  or,  descend, 


499 


II7II  bbtejlfe  fefete  fefei  I 


fefeb  bifefeb  9 


lie\ll  :iiy  ^  fe±fe  IfellaUi  I  febb  HJfeitej  jbfej  jblojlb  bb  feiife 

ll^ll  :ilij  Jbbfepstelfe  I  :jbtej£  tetbite  ifeifej  JXifcib  hi  lfete 

llVill  :fab  fet  fe^fe  lib  I  l$Xi  fe>bh  iftph  feiifc  Mftifr 

iixii  %bikt  fe£  bibb  i  bbjBahlihh  ysi£  x^Ljte  tite  ^  ih± 
ilfell  ibite  bbifejfe  itei.  I  :iiy  ysiote  i[JLh  :h.  ^T»i.t>  fe> 

llhlt  :fe£lfeafejfe  bj  I  IbiJ  fete  jmfe|  fe  pp^k  febjfejib 

lt£ll  b£fe  b  tei.  bi^te  I  b'feisj  febjfehj  feli  Jte|MJJs  Jfe  Sate 

ft? 

:Jb2l5fe  Hfl££ 


a'HH  OIXSAH  HH1  OX  SNPVAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


USHANA  KAVYA 
Sukta  84 

1.  Your  guest  most  beloved  I  laud  who  is  like  a  beloved 
friend,  Fire  who  is  as  if  the  chariot  of  our  journey,  the 
one  whom  we  must  know. 

2.  He  whom  as  the  seer  and  thinker  the  gods  have 
now  set  within  twofold  in  mortals. 

3.  O  thou  ever-young,  guard  men  who  give,  hear  our 
words;  protect  the  son  by  the  Self. 

4.  O  divine  Fire,  O  Angiras,  O  child  of  energy,  by 
what  word,  the  laud,  for  thy  supreme  thinking? 

5.  By  the  mind  of  what  master  of  sacrifice  shall  we 
give,  O  son  of  force;  how  shall  I  word  this  prostration 
of  my  surrender? 

6.  Mayst  thou  thyself  create  for  us  all  worlds  of  a 
happy  dwelling,  make  our  words  a  source  of  the  plenitude 
and  the  riches. 

7.  In  whose  wide-moving  thought  dost  thou  take 
delight,  O  mastei  of  the  house;  thou  from  whom  come 
our  words  in  the  conquest  of  the  Light? 

8.  Him  they  make  bright  the  strong  of  will  and  he  goes 
in  front  in  the  race;1  he  is  a  master  of  plenitude  in  his 
own  abodes. 


1  or;  in  'he  contests; 


501 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 

*TfcT  frfcf  R:  I  3*rg  ggfT  WKW 

SHTTift  VTT^: 

gpret  ^rfn  ^  srere  >  u?u 

h  g  fswm  ^t  31^  ^  IRII 

5  ferspT  *fa5*  1  "f*  "ft  ^raraft  '^" 

8ft»nFTOfa*iM«iM4gT  g%«  "fa  ^1”'^ ,mi 

c.  o  « 

1%  gig^gg  gfa  TH^TT.^  I  3lfa  R^HHW  ll^ll 
3TT  *RI  ^falJRSIT  ’I1^  1^  '  RR^HRW  U^H 

arfht  gt  gg^TOtgrT'Tt  'jWW  1  "*®1  ^  ,,V3U 


502 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


9.  He  dwells  safe  on  perfect  foundations  and  there  are 
none  to  slay  him,  it  is  he  who  slays;  O  Fire,  he  is  a  mighty 
hero  and  prosperous. 


PRAYOGA  BHARGAVA 
SUKTA  102 

1.  Thou,  O  divine  Fire,  foundest  a  vast  expansion  for 
the  giver,  thou  art  the  seer,  the  youth,  the  master  of  the 
house. 

2.  Do  thou,  O  Fire  of  the  wide  light,  who  art  awake 
to  knowledge,  go  with  our  word  of  prayer  and  of  works 
and  call  the  gods. 

3.  With  thee  indeed  as  an  ally,  most  strong  in  thy 
urge,  we  overcome  for  the  conquest  of  the  plenitude. 

4.  Even  as  the  Flame-Seer,  Son  of  the  Wideness,  even 
as  the  Doer  of  Works  I  invoke  the  pure  ocean-dwelling 
Fire. 

5.  I  call  the  force  which  has  the  sound  of  the  wind 
and  the  cry  of  the  rain,  the  ocean-dwelling  Fire. 

6.  1  call  like  the  creation  of  the  Creator-Sun,  like  the 
delight  of  the  Lord  of  Delight,  the  ocean-dwelling  Fire. 

7.  For  the  forceful  offspring  of  the  pilgrim-sacrifices 
towards  Fire  as  he  grows  in  his  multitudes, — 


503 


toe 

ll'lill  a  teja  ttjb  bias  lie  l  labjys  fet  ^blfaiabJbJUa  a±bb  bile 
i IV) in  iihjal  ait  i£h  t  :bjbj^jl£ablbs^ai^li  a±a£  Sb 

iixin  kaa  iaa  tyj&ijbiie  i  tthsjbfeitebkija  baaiiaaj  a±a 

\ 

nfein  ktaijie  ^(Kaaia  i  :b4aa^bisaj^  *>aj  ifabib  ia>  h£ 

nkiii  khiEsabia  b  abj  i  ainbapk  aaj  £jynL  b|bm  b  b±abb 

ni in  tbUK^  aia\a  i  lfea^a  ja  l2^  abjy^bi^ 

(loin  it  hoi;  h&n  bi^le  I  bbbilia  llab^  £hjlh^aj 

> 

ll'bll  bbb  lb  hkblb  lie  l  £tbb  a^bbijsjaissj  HJle  IbibJ  aie 

U?||  :bbilia  lfebb  bile  i  ia$b  a^b  i2abi  bfeblle  b  lha  aie 


;mu  OI1SAM  3HJ.  OJ.  S'NJMAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


8.  So  that  he  may  come  to  be  with  us  like  the  Form- 
Maker  coming  to  the  forms  he  has  to  carve,  us  made 
glorious  by  his  will  at  work. 

9.  This  Fire  travels  in  the  gods  towards  all  glories; 
may  he  come  to  us  with  the  plenitudes. 

10.  Laud  here  the  most  glorious  of  priests  of  the  call, 
the  supreme1  Fire  in  the  sacrifices. 

1 1.  The  intense  Fire  with  its  purifying  light  who  dwells 
eldest  in  our  homes,  shines  out  as  one  who  hears  from 
afar. 

12.  Declare  him,  O  illumined  sage,  as  the  powerful 
and  conquering  war-horse,  as  the  friend  who  takes  man 
to  the  goal  of  his  journey. 

13.  Towards  thee  come  the  words  of  the  giver  of  the 
offerings  marking  thee  out  and  stand  firm  as  companions 
in  the  might  of  the  wind. 

14.  Thou  whose  triple-seat  of  sacrifice  is  untied  and 
unconfined  and  the  waters  also  have  established  thy 
abode, — 

15.  The  abode  of  the  bounteous  godhead  with  its 
inviolate  safeties,  like  a  happy  regard  of  the  Sun. 

16.  O  divine  Fire,  by  our  thinkings  of  the  light,  burn¬ 
ing  with  thy  flame,  bring  to  us  the  gods  and  do  them 
sacrifice. 


1  or,  the  ancient 


505 


Ilbil  bjkltt  tkkfclk  kj  JtbJh  Xklk  kK 

I  ikh*k  k  ISiK:  lEPktjK  IklS^S  K 


|| ^ II  :iitj  ^k  k±ttk  u^kkhb  h^hlkPlk'  k  Jhk 
I  :k£lfcdlkk  kk->jh  |kUkj£ll>  lijile 

!Mt 

:hhi'±  :Hi±lH 

nhhU  :fcjk±kfej  h^tbipe  l  :ikk  H%k  kkj  ikkk  jklJ3iJ±Jki}ie 

llikllkkfc  H  fcikk  fek  1  kjhkkjfe  (jS-gb  J<fe!lji£jhftAfeJ2 
llo^n  fcPofrjh  Lk  I  kjh.3g  iaj^lfc  B  IkkJ  BJ1X  kjkfe  kikfct 

llUll^  hjl>.h±kkkte  I  Bjkdkkkjtyki  k  U2i3k^le  k  ijk 
ll?i  II  XXJk  kj  'ilkin'i  I  kkn>k  k.£  k±skx  lki  kk%JS 

llfcill  k^kh^ikh^  |  :iJ:jis  jmkk  kpfe  :ikik  k 


3313  OIXSAH  3HX  OX  SNJAIAH 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


17.  The  mothers  bore  thee,  the  gods  brought  thee  to 
birth  as  the  seer,  the  immortal,  the  carrier  of  offering, 
O  Angiras. 

18.  O  Fire,  O  seer,  they  set  thee  within  as  the  thinker, 
the  desirable  messenger,  carrier  of  the  offerings. 

19.  Mine  is  not  the  cow  unslayable,  I  have  no  axe  at 
hand,  so  I  bring  to  thee  this  little  that  I  have. 

20.  What  we  place  for  thee  a  few  chance  logs  them 
accept,  O  ever-young  Fire. 

21.  What  is  eaten  by  the  ant,  what  the  white  ant 
overruns,  let  all  that  be  to  thee  as  if  thy  food  of  light.1 

22.  Kindling  the  Fire  let  mortal  man  cleave  with  his 
mind  to  the  Thought;  by  things  luminous2  I  kindle  the 
Fire. 


SOBHARI  KANWA 
SUKTA  103 

1.  He  is  seen,  the  great  path-finder  in  whom  they 
have  founded  the  laws  of  our  action;  to  the  Fire  well¬ 
born,  increaser  of  the  Aryan,  go  our  words. 

2.  Fire  lit  by  the  Servant  of  Heaven  travels  in  his 
might  towards  the  gods  along  our  mother  earth  and  on 
heaven’s  peak  he  takes  his  stand. 


1  or,  as  if  clarified  butter. 

2  or,  by  the  shining  ones 


507 


IUM  PklilXhJglfe  iaJK  miyX 

l  :pgih^a  12,'HJH  :iax£te>4&  man  Pirn  lie 


II7II  kbits  ^mPfohF-. 

I  talaj^ifcii;  P~£p  PsIPTfc  PMP  hIPqSjh  IS 


ilSMI  PIP^P  ^teli  bjh  Phmj  Hii  btt  ifeJP  it£ 
i  :ktm%  pm^HP  iisi  yty±  a  fetK 


ll^n  hP»iP.»i?  lk(P4  JS  hii2±IHbiS  iteih  kUah 
I  pipipi*'  i£ih  Sib  mm  JPSPJ  ys 


uV)U  ajj±m  idjiiim  mmj  um^x  mim  m 
I  :feJs  PJttJle  pm  £  LPEUfrlfr  £Jii>P  KJ£jy  £ 


llxll  hluJaJ^ba^H  i££i  p£Jttkfr£  iilie  £fe  £ 

I  Piili  ISb  tm  mil  £]blj±bj  bli  £  is 


u^n  ktutm  mjm  msmm  PPjipmPh  m&sm 

I  :££o£  PJita^Si22a^  P^PlipH? 


aaia  oixsak  a  hi  ox  snpmah 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


3.  Fire  because  of  whom  men  doing  the  works  that 
have  to  be  done,  grow  luminous,  him  conqueror  of  the 
thousands  as  if  in  t{ie  winning  of  the  purities  they  serve 
by  the  self1,  by  their  thoughts. 

4.  He  whom  thou  willst  to  lead  to  the  Riches,  the 
mortal  who  gives  to  thee,  O  shining  One,  he  holds  in 
himself,  O  Fire,  the  hero,  who  utters  the  word,  who 
increases  the  thousands. 

5.  He  rends  open  the  plenitude  even  in  the  strong 
place  by  the  war-horse,  he  founds  an  imperishable 
inspired  knowledge;  O  thou  of  the  many  riches,  in  thee 
we  ever  hold  in  the  godheads  all  beautiful  things. 

6.  He  who  gives  to  us  all  treasures,  men’s  rapturous 
priest  of  the  call,  to  him  our  lauds  go  forth  as  if  supreme 
vessels  of  the  honey-wine. 

7.  The  lavish  givers,  the  seekers  of  the  godhead,  make 
him  bright  by  their  words  as  if  currying  a  chariot-horse. 
O  powerful  for  action,  O  lord  of  peoples,  in  the  son  of 
our  begettings  thou  carriest  achievement  of  the  possessors 
of  riches  beyond  both  the  firmaments. 

8.  Chant  to  the  most  bounteous,  the  possessor  of  the 
Truth,  the  brilliant  in  light,  coming  with  the  laud,  to  the 
Fire. 

9.  High-kindled,  fed  with  the  offering  full  of  light,  the 
lord  of  riches  conquers  a  heroic  glory ;  often  may  his  new 
right-thinking  come  towards  us  with  the  plenitudes, — 


1  or,  of  themselves, 


a35 


509 


019 


I  hPlhh\tt  %lb  bxlit 


HUU:ife3fei  :^PI>  HUi^ 

I  tisy bdjaij  ^  y± 


llhill  :ifeafei  rn^S  :fc 
I  :jab  KA&tftfi  ^j^StefejjjjhlHynl  lb  Ut 


II  uu  >£ilfe  mhj  mwti  JiibK  bib  li2aS 

I  pjpfrfr  ifiiyii  ibib  mfejte  mijy  jb  ibb)£ 


Ito^u  htitb  iklbl  Jbtjte 
I  kfrjEjUaBHiBi  jlfllbbj  h2ab 


aau  oixsaw  a  hi  01  snwah 


MANDALA  EIGHT 


10.  O  thou  who  pressest  the  wine,  laucl  the  Fire,  the 
guest  most  beloved  of  the  beloved,  the  controller  of  the 
chariots, — 

1 1 .  The  master  of  sacrifice  who  turns  towards  us  the 
hidden  treasures  now  risen  and  known,  he  in  whose 
downward  descent  is  a  rush  as  of  waves  hard  to  cross, 
when  he  conquers  by  the  thought  the  plenitudes. 

12.  May  not  Fire,  the  guest  the  shining  One  widely 
proclaimed,  be  wrath  with  us;  this  is  he  who  is  the 
perfect  priest  of  the  call  perfect  in  the  pilgrim-rite. 

13.  May  they  not  come  to  harm  by  any  of  their  move¬ 
ments  who  approach  thee  with  invocation,  O  Fire,  O 
shining  One;  for  the  singer  of  the  hymn1  who  has  given 
the  offering  and  does  well  the  pilgrim-rite  demands  of 
thee  the  office  of  the  messenger. 

14.  Come,  O  Fire,  with  the  Rudras,  comrade  of  the 
life-gods  for  the  drinking  of  the  Soma  wine,  to  the  laud 
of  Sobhari  and  take  thy  rapture  in  the  godhead  of  the 
Sun-world. 


1  or,  the  doer  ol'  works 


511 


MANDALA  TEN 


llVill  hlHH*  tejPjhHjlfej  JilteJ  hjh^K 


I  i±Pil£k  P% 


fci'iJ=3l±fcl£.feJ 


Ilxll  Siyjklh  fefej  hi  Bps  LttkhilhS  hjhiti  I  LP 

I  :gfcP>,fe  PJJS  |Pk£hJ  ifej  £l  Mie 


llfell  fei2iifei£tie  hi  i^feie  j&h  *->*>»>  im* 

I  PJlh  hJJikfe  ^jj££jjg^  h->kk>h  lh-^jkobj 


Hill  :illkfe!fei±jife  tejle  J&t&Jit  JS  bfefetellia  >jh  ilfclfcj  ;labj 
I  Jay?.Jali?  J&kjklk  HJis  Jhli  (Pit*  a 


Hill  :Usi2iitkii  JLfeSJfej  jpite  lie  lb^lKbtjle 

I  k]tlhPJ(te;  JPh^  kLfeiltteJSJlhiK  ^HlPhK.$£>  k,k> 

l 

k£l 


TRITA  APTYA 


SUKTA  1 

1.  High  and  vast  the  Fire  stood  in  front  of  the  dawns; 
issuing  out  of  the  darkness  he  came  with  the  Light: 
Fire,  a  perfect  body  of  brilliant  lustre,  filled  out  at  his  very 
birth  all  the  worlds. 

2.  Thou  art  the  child  born  from  earth  and  heaven, 
the  child  beautiful  carried  in  the  growths  of  earth;  an 
infant  many-hued,  thou  goest  forth  crying  aloud  from  the 
mothers  around  the  nights  and  the  darknesses. 

3.  Vishnu  knowing  rightly  the  supreme  plane  of  this 
Fire,  born  in  his  vastness,  guards  the  third  (plane) ;  when 
in  his  mouth  they  have  poured  the  milk  (of  the  cow), 
conscious  they  shine  here  towards  his  own  home. 

4.  Hence  the  mothers  who  bear  that  draught  come  with 
their  food  to  thee,  and  thou  growest  by  the  food :  to  them 
the  same,  but  other  in  their  forms,  thou  comest  (returnest) 
again,  then  art  thou  priest  of  the  call  in  human  beings. 

• 

5.  The  priest  of  the  call  of  the  pilgrim-rite  with  his 
many-hued  chariot,  in  the  brilliant  ray  of  intuition  of 
sacrifice  on  sacrifice,  Fire  the  guest  of  man  who  takes  to 
himself  the  half  of  each  god  in  might  and  glory. 


515 


•'fell  rn  tolltoale  yi  itoy*  ly  Pi^b  j*j  u)3bju.jK> 

I  toxig(PK  tofeto  blfePfe«a>?  JttiiihLLfeih  bptLbibfe  He 


tlbll  kaihtj^^n  tolto£  *tog  bjjtol  iblblnj.  b£  iliua 
I  ItolP^  liUftfeji  bjltoitoih  ibiki*  K|h  hjp 


lUll  :gaMjhlh*hllnPy=i  toi  fctihjyile^j3l£  ltoeto  to 

I  £toito  yhBVp'te  )3bJ  <?abjb  {Pltfr  lb*>  $J|Khj 


h  m 


lisu I  totto^  £to  ihsifcitejto  IPi^Sallito  is 

I  todtoto  lltolb  to  yc£  ltob  toto  totoe  i^bjhibiia  ns 


ll^n  bitoii  lyeto  Pl*l>  jPSjivR  :nnc»S  £ii  :mu>  |tae>K> 
I  :]to2tojb  ik^totoyie  itoltoto  pjipi^  hbnik->b  §  h 


3HIJ  DUSAN  3 Hi  Ol  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


6.  Putting  on  robes,  putting  on  forms,  Fire  in  the  navel- 
centre  of  the  earth  is  born  a  ruddy  flame,  in  the  seat  of 
Revelation.  O  King,  as  the  priest  set  in  front  sacrifice  to 
the  gods. 

7.  Ever,  O  Fire,  thou  hast  stretched  out  earth  and 
heaven,  as  their  son  thou  hast  built  up  thy  father  and 
mother:  O  ever  young,  journey  towards  the  gods  who 
desire  thee;  then  bring  them  to  us,  O  forceful  Flame! 


Sukta  2* 

1 .  Satisfy  the  desire  of  the  gods,  O  thou  ever  young,  do 
sacrifice  here,  a  knower  of  its  order  and  its  times,  O  master 
of  the  order  and  time  of  things;  with  those  who  are 
divine  priests  of  the  order  of  the  work  thou,  O  Fire, 
art  the  strongest  for  sacrifice. 

2.  Thou  comest  to  men’s  invocation,  thou  comest  to 
the  purification,  thou  art  the  thinker,  the  giver  of  the 
riches,  the  possessor  of  the  Truth:  may  we  make  the  offer¬ 
ings  with  Swaha;  may  Fire,  availing,  do  the  sacrifice,  a 
god  to  the  gods. 

3.  We  have  come  to  the  path  of  the  gods,  may  we  have 
power  to  tread  it,  to  drive  forward  along  that  road.  The 
Fire  is  the  knower,  let  him  do  sacrifice;  he  verily  is  the 
priest  of  the  call,  he  makes  effective  the  pilgrim-sacrifices 
and  the  order  of  our  works. 


*  In  the  exoteric  sense,  “flu”  seems  to  mean  the  rites  of  the  sacrifice. 


517 


816 


M^ii  ksibhjj^i  mih  Mjut  Sjijiy 

i  rnsie  u»b£  M&b  jsu  jshjh  iKjjjam 

£ 


IIGMI  Bjiit  JSJ  hlXfctB  jnJhEhj  fellfeps  T-mb^h 

I  HfcJfcS!  ju±bjj£&  Ifei  b  i^bHhifc^  h  ^bjhibira  i>^>  t 


ll^ll  iiihi  :ia  fr^h  He  a 

I  tM;  i£j  jjjbjle  bfej  4.|kkiir.i>b^r^  ih^tbj 


H'nU  iymti  JX£  ffifrjt?  kbilL%teJ&fe 

I  ^l?ih  bi£b  k  l±Sbi4£  Hikb  H?.»lh  Mb 


11*11  HJJbh^2  :.Rj6ifc  lfe&i*Jb  kiej  HJilxih 

I  :Hl>_Eaffejie  ibb  jhSfrj  hjihjs  hlbhJK  hk  <2b 


3HIJ  0I1SAW  3H1  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


4.  Whatever  we  may  impair  of  the  laws  of  your  work¬ 
ings,  O  gods,  we  in  our  ignorance  maiming  your  work¬ 
ings  who  know,  all  that  may  the  Fire  who  is  a  knower 
make  full  by  that  order  in  time  with  which  he  makes 
effective  the  gods. 

5.  What  in  the  sacrifice  mortals  in  the  ignorance  of 
their  minds,  poor  in  discernment,  cannot  think  out, 
that  the  Fire  knows,  the  priest  of  the  call,  the  finder  of 
the  right-will,  strongest  of  sacrificants  and  does  the 
sacrifice  to  the  gods  in  the  order  and  times  of  the  truth. 

6.  The  father  brought  thee  to  birth,  the  force  of  all 
pilgrim-sacrifices,  the  many-hued  ray  of  intuition;  so  do 
thou  win  for  us  by  sacrifice  in  the  line  of  the  planes  with 
thcii  godheads,  their  desirable  and  opulent  universal 
forces. 

7.  Thou  whom  heaven  and  earth,  thou  whom  the 
waters,  thou  whom  the  form-maker,  creator  of  perfect 
births,  have  brought  into  being,  O  Fire,  luminously  along 
the  path  of  the  journey  of  the  Fathers  knowing  it 
beforehand  high-kindled  blaze. 


Sukta  3 

1.  He  is  seen  high-kindled,  the  master  ruling  all,  the 
traveller,  the.  terrible,  he  who  creates  perfectly  right 
undei standing,  awake  to  knowledge  he  shines  wide  with 
a  vast  lustre;  driving  the  ruddy  bright  cow  he  comes  to 
the  dark  one. 


519 


II6UI  :Uaii  ib  lbiki  J^bihi  :<fe§£  rbijte 

i  :(fr>^pj>>(j7=.fejh->»j  liijH  &  be  b  £jh  tejfe  lie  a 


1 1^11  ifetfej  b^ltbjii£jlt^  fej  IhPPj^jttk  ^HjP^K 
I  :£jbbj  bbbbi  b4Pib$te^hPNtl*>  ^pihaTt  wit 


•  •  V>H  kbe  PJ^)PHJP^PPj^hjb'g-jh^|tk  ^uju^hjoah* 

I  :k£jS  :b£b  h^Pikia.^  ^-»Ph  :Pikik  h^h  b  ip>» 


1 1  At  I  KfrJP^febfel&hm  IRLbtbt  \bifei  :p£p  h->h.s| 

I  :b2>b  :bite  ibife-»pjpffc>  b  |p£p  bite 


II fell  fc'JbifcbJi  bjik^jtek  bSsbJbjbtJibJfiJt'^bS 
I  bibSh  bj&tte  Jib£  >IPP->  PI  kite  PIHPP  IhSk  |J5k 


llhll  lyiit  EjPJ>>kjfip  beij  Ph»kP^  blit  fea!£ 

I  kytShJ  :b£b  bab2  kbbte£Jtt  ibhb  kjH|P^h  jir,i$ 


3HIJ  OIXSAXi  3 MX  OX  SNJAIAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


2.  When  he  overspread  with  his  body  the  black  night 
and  the  dappled  dawn  bringing  to  birth  the  young 
maiden  born  from  the  great  Father,  pillaring  the  high- 
lifted  light  of  the  sun,  the  traveller  shines  out  with  the 
riches1  of  heaven. 

3.  He  has  come  closely  companioning  her  happy  with 
her  happy,  a  lover  he  follows  behind  his  sister;  Fire 
spreading  out  with  his  lights  full  of  conscious  knowledge 
overlays  her  beauty  with  his  ruddy  shining  hues. 

4.  His  movements  flaming  send  forth  as  if  vast  callings 
of  Fire  the  beneficent  comrade  in  the  march  of  this 
mighty  and  adorable  flame,  the  vast  and  beautiful  his 
radiances  blazing  have  waked  to  knowledge. 

5.  His  blazings  as  he  shines  stream  like  sounds  of  bright 
heaven  in  its  vastness;  with  his  greatest,  most  splendid 
and  opulent  lights  at  play  he  travels  to  heaven. 

6.  His  strengths  are  those  of  a  thunderbolt  seen  in  the 
hurling,  they  neigh  aloud  in  their  teams;  he,  the  traveller, 
most  divine,  shines  wide-pervading  with  his  ancientruddy 
chanting  fires. 

7.  So  carry  for  us,  so  take  thy  seat,  the  mighty  traveller 
of  the  young  earth  and  heaven,  Fire  the  swift  and  vehe¬ 
ment  with  his  swift  and  vehement  horses, — so  mayst 
thou  come  to  us  here. 


1  or,  the  shining  ones 


521 


Ilfell  :;M:l£jtotolk  to  hi  lto-feto  ltojtolt  Jtotoato  toils  to£ 

I  WlP^bb+>PjltbhjlPH;>  bPb  !><b>P  bPtPPP 


llBlI  :^i±  bttokls  to  ^tobfeb  toj£  to  to  Jittoto  \hlPIP4te 
I  :£^toh  Jtotojh  ^toito  toto  Jtoato  Bitototo  totoltobtojto 


11*11  toto  :tojhifej  tojtoto  tolllj^  btoitolltoj  tojlfeltojto  toll 

I  JiltoJ  ;£hfel  toitoto^Jb  JtoltoJtoJ  toto  to  litis  lilt 


II fell  :2atoto)to>jftrh  %bUtto^tol  bjito  ippk  bj>|Pb 
I  IPItob-»PbP  tojlttoj  itolli  (P-»bbb  bito  to  Bltj 


Mill  totofejl  tojltoii^totoitoitoltotot  tojltltolto^  Jtol 
I  2atojto  toto  tobjlnato  toito  p--J>pp  tojis  ipipp  itoi  to 


II J H  totoll  tolls  tol£  ^tlitol  pftob^  PJP  IhK  bfejb^b 
I  toto^  Jto  iltoito  lbto  Jtok  toito  MjbS  to  is  i&Jto  ^  is 


a 


anil  OIJLSAJ-V  3H1  Ol  SNIMAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


SUKTA  4 

1.  To  thee  I  sacrifice,  to  thee  I  send  forth  my  thought 
so  that  thou  mayst  manifest  thyself  adorable  at  our  call; 
thou  art  like  a  fountain  in  the  desert  to  longing  men,  O 
ancient  king,  O  Fire. 

2.  O  ever-young  flame,  towards  thee  men  move,  like 
herds  that  go  to  a  warm  pen;  thou  art  the  messenger  of 
gods  and  mortals,  thou  movest  between  them  vast  through 
the  luminous  world. 

3.  The  mother  bears  thee  like  an  infant  child  clinging 
cherishingly  to  thee,  increasing  thee  to  be  a  conqueror; 
headlong  down  over  the  dry  land  he  goes  rejoicing,  he  is 
fain  to  go  like  an  animal  let  loose. 

4.  O  thou  who  art  conscious  and  free  from  ignorance, 
ignorant  are  we  and  we  know  not  thy  greatness,  thou  only 
knowest.  Covert  he  lies,  he  ranges  devouring  with  his 
tongue  of  flame,  he  licks  the  young  earth  and  is  the  master 
of  her  creatures. 

5.  Anywhere  he  is  born  new  in  eternal  wombs;  he 
stands  in  the  forest  hoary-old  with  smoke  for  his  banner: 
a  bull  unbathed  he  journeys  to  the  waters  and  mortals 
who  are  conscious  lead  him  on  his  way. 

6.  Two  robbers  abandoning  their  bodies,  rangers  of 
the  forest,  have  planted  him  in  his  place  with  ten  cords. 
This  is  thy  new  thinking,  O  Fire,  yoke  thyself  to  it  with 
thy  illumining  limbs  like  a  chariot. 


523 


iixii  MJdTih  ^ifeaueaiak  mump  mfe^bte 

I  p.pp  :k£jts  bJL&ia  |bajPi*-fc  :napa  %  i^pt* 


iifen  tataaj  jaah  La  utxtjb'-fc  (P>fr  ajia  h-^pj 

|  (P-.hhpfcpU'  Tteltej  IfcOhJ  PIPS  a  l^hJIH  |PfrjlPlte 


ufcn  inj-Lih  ^aj£  ajiaia  iMt  aijjb  tj  i&a-b  aa  a4P-^ 
i  :ajiaaa  ifoSja  ^p>jp-  &  :jaiaa  ijnhp  224a  ph*p 


Hill  :%  £tb  J%bJ  a&t±  b.^ifrnPjhh^hPj 

1  2aa  aj  ia±axja  ^a^aia^  yni>h»  ygaa  :<ab 

v>  2& 


ne\ii  aa^aisie  |p*p^p  ay&i  atya  pjiapp  aas  41a  asi 
1  aa  4j±a?aj?>a  :4a  a  aptap  |»^piu>  ^  a 


a^ia  OIXSAH  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


7.  Thine  is  this  wisdom-word,  O  knower  of  all  things 
born,  and  this  prostration,  this  utterance  is  thine;  may 
it  have  ever  the  power  to  make  thee  grow.  Guard  all 
that  are  offspring  of  our  begetting,  guard  undeviatingly 
our  bodies. 


Sukta  5 

1 .  One  sole  ocean  holding  all  the  riches,  born  in  mani¬ 
fold  births  from  our  heart  it  sees  all;  there  cleave  to  the 
teat  in  the  lap  of  the  two  secret  ones  in  the  midst  of  the 
fountain-source  the  hidden  seat  of  the  being. 

2.  The  stallions  inhabiting  a  common  abode,  the 
great  stallions  have  met  with  the  mares.  The  seers  guard 
the  seat  of  the  Truth,  they  hold  in  the  secrecy  the  supreme 
Names. 

3.  The  two  mothers  in  whom  is  the  Truth,  in  whom  is 
the  mage  wisdom,  formed  him  and  brought  to  birth  like 
an  infant  child  they  have  put  him  firm  in  his  place  and 
make  him  grow.  Men  found  in  him  the  navel-centre  of 
all  that  is  moving  and  stable  and  they  weave  by  the 
mind  the  weft  of  the  seer. 

4.  Him  well-born  the  routes  of  the  Truth  and  its 
ancient  impulsions  close  companion  for  the  plenitude. 
Heaven  and  earth  give  lodging  to  him  whose  dwelling  is 
above  them,1  they  make  him  grow  by  the  lights  and  foods 
of  their  sweetnesses. 


1  or,  as  their  inhabitant, 


a36 


525 


925 


II hit  :kajk  t  Jikk  JktiiJhS^tt&Jk  Jaitefej  Jk  lie 
I  ikikkjkjklk  iJ2 


lUllifcikiy  |P(fe>Jh  kjkk  linhfohjkik  ^khJSak* 
I  .ysakJlP>JK-  i^4ktlKJ<fe£ki£  bin  k  Me 

B  kith 


IICMI  :kb  tikkte  kJMK  kh  >»p>-  iMik.fe.ls  :k  Mktjle 
I  fekiiiHMjiikiM  hxkztL  kk^te  %ih  kMk  kakie 


ll^ll  ih±k  klnkfe  kkkj  UxL  2ik  t&hhk  kiMk  ilkiie 
I  kilt  ^Sfet^HjUfe^iPiP^pp^fefeii.  liijkk  kak 


ll'hll  MiniaS  P^fejHfejfe  k<2i£  ll*i>K  .SijkiJS  ^feP^ 
I  k£  iSM  mkJ££k  fe'ik  klSkj  ^Pi)tfep^i»Pfe->  .tak 


3kH  DIXSAN  3HX  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


5.  Desiring  the  seven  shining  sisters,  the  knower  bore 
on  high  their  sweetnesses  that  he  might  have  vision;  he 
who  was  born  from  of  old  laboured  within  in  the  mid¬ 
world,  he  wished  for  and  found  the  covering  of  the  all- 
fostering  sun. 

6.  The  seers  fashioned  the  seven  goals,1  towards  one  of 
them  alone  goes  the  narrow  and  difficult  road.  A  pillar 
of  the  supreme  being  in  its  abode,  he  stands  at  the  starting- 
out  of  the  ways,  in  the  upholding  laws. 

7.  He  is  the  being  and  non-being  in  the  supreme 
ether,  in  the  birth  of  the  Understanding  in  the  lap  of  the 
indivisible  mother.  Fire  comes  to  us  as  the  first-born  of 
the  Truth,  he  is  the  Bull  and  milch  Cow  in  the  original 
existence. 


Sukta  6 

1.  This  is  he  in  whose  peace,2  and  in  his  approach  to 
it  grows  by  his  guardings  the  worshipper  of  the  Fire, 
who  encompasses  all  and  is  spread  everywhere  luminous 
with  the  largest  lights  of  the  wise.3 

2.  Fire,  who  shines  perpetual,  possessor  of  the  Truth, 
luminous  with  divine  lights,  he  who  follows  out  the 
works  of  a  comrade  for  his  comrades  like  a  courser  running 
straight  to  his  goal. 


1  or,  the  seven  frontiers, 

2  or,  house  ot  refuge, 

3  or,  with  his  largest  lights  for  the  wise. 


527 


Ulw  :ms  In  jfra^g%IS  HXfe  kk  £p±%a 

I  k%  Mbi£j2  iiafeji  iile  ^  ^  iajii 

6\  a i& 


II6MI  :itti£  bdtUxti  J±le  Ufi.tX  H  « 

I  bkfe  maS  imp*  J£h  m&kj  i£h  faili  ihie 


ll^n  ue  kite  iky-^feie  ihPPIPP-Ojlpf  liile 

I  :jeh  :ip»i k  ^fehiMi  kJ&Ja  iMJeJ  kttjii  it 


llV,||  mpiSp  Ms  ftfrfcPIfr  Ife-iafej  12  ae 

I  kteinS  HhJJlibitJJli  HjhblhKfc  k  XiUJliXfaH 


11*11  kte^  ajfctej  l>HJte  ^tkjp  :raiLji2  it  ^ 

I  yjiitisj  ifeihkfc  l£ale  l^kifete  ynitiS-  itekrtj^i? 


llfell  :.til5  XJlH.tXi 

I  ^eaita 


ikH  pp->jh  lie 

gBAE**  ^  is# 


anii  OIXSAIAI  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


3.  He  who  has  power  for  every  advent  of  godhead,  who 
has  power  for  the  outbreak-  of  the  dawn  and  is  the  life  of 
all,  Fire  in  whom  our  thinkings  are  cast  as  offerings,  his 
chariot  goes  unhurt  and  he  supports  all  his  strengths. 

4.  Increasing  by  his  strengths,  rejoicing  in  his  illumina¬ 
tions  he  goes  a  swift  galloper  towards  the  gods;  he  is  the 
rapturous  priest  of  the  call  strong  to  sacrifice  with  his 
tongue  of  flame  inseparable  from  the  gods  the  Fire 
sheds  on  them  his  light. 

5.  Him  fashion  for  you  with  your  words  and  your 
obeisances  as  if  Indra  quivering  at  the  dawn-ray,  him 
whom  illumined  sages  voice  with  their  thoughts,  the 
knower  of  all  things  born,  the  overpowering  Flame. 

6.  Thou  in  whom  all  the  Riches  meet  together  in  the 
plenitude  like  horses  by  their  gallopings  in  their  speed 
towards  the  goal,  the  protections  most  desired  by  Indra 
to  us  make  close,  O  Fire. 

7.  Now,  indeed,  taking  thy  seat  in  thy  greatness,  O 
Fire,  in  thy  very  birth  thou  hast  become  the  one  to  whom 
we  must  call;  the  gods  walked  by  the  ray  of  thy  intui¬ 
tion,  then  they  grew  and  were  the  first  and  supreme 
helpers. 


Sukta  7 

1.  Found  for  us  felicity  of  earth  and  heaven  and  uni¬ 
versal  life  that  we  may  worship  thee  with  sacrifice,  O 
god;  O  doer  of  works,  may  we  keep  close  to  thy  percep¬ 
tions  of  knowledge;  guard  us,  O  god,  with  thy  wide 
utterances. 


529 


OSS 


U'iU  Plpfi  jam  Jaitsfa  iistusi  KibdP.fc 

I  :iP|*K?>Mn$  :aah  P  ibj  kps  Pi  PJiJ  fr»u>h  pPa 


I|V,||  P^frMPh-.  iiPji  hill 

i  him  rr»^.hPP^)HP^hi  muts  Mtjimj  plptjxa 


iixit  ktkhjimjke  nt^hj.Bkk£  b.  mmte. 

i  u^pMbj  lie  Hi  ijnip  pmki  ^Lfej  pm  mpj 


Hfell  piM?  tkTi;  bjpj  frhP  :P$E>  <P(P>P>K> 

I  khi^p  kipm  >pim  p>jHhjihPjh>Phj  mu  mie 


nku  pipfc  :.Hjpp±  ymm  pitpgpihifiH  ke  ym  jl&p 

I  :j3li  mjlalt  Kjimikjyi  mm  fctfohPh  bite  JLhJI 


3HI3  OUSAK  3 HI  Ol  SNPIAH 


MANDALA  TEN 

2.  For  thee  these  thoughts  are  born,  O  Fire,  towards 
thee  they  voice  our  achievement  of  riches  with  its  horses 
of  power  and  herds  of  light  when  the  mortal  upheld  by 
his  thoughts  following  thee  attains  to  thy  enjoyment, 
O  Fire,  perfectly  born,  O  shining  One. 

3.  I  think  of  the  Fire  as  my  father,  my  ally,  my  brother, 
ever  my  comrade;  I  serve  the  force  of  vast  Fire,  his 
bright  and  worshipped  force  of  the  Sun  in  heaven. 


4.  O  Fire,  effective  in  us  are  thy  thoughts  and  con¬ 
querors  of  our  aims:  he  whom  thou  deliverest,  thou  the 
eternal  priest  of  the  call  in  the  house,  who  art  that  driver 
of  the  red  horses,  possessed  of  the  Truth,  possessor  of  the 
much  store  of  riches,  may  happiness  be  his  through  the 
shining  days. 

5.  The  Fire  founded  by  the  heavens1  as  our  friend  and 
the  means  for  our  works,  the  ancient  priest  of  the  pilgrim- 
rites,  the  lover  men  brought  into  being  by  the  strength 
of  their  two  arms  and  seated  within  as  the  priest  of  the 
call  in  beings. 

6.  Thyself  sacrifice  in  heaven  to  the  gods,  for  what 
shall  man  miniature  in  thought  and  unconscious  of  the 
knowledge  do  of  thy  work?  Even  as  thou  didst  sacrifice 
in  the  order  and  times  of  the  Truth,  a  god  to  the  gods, 
O  perfectly  born  Fire,  so  sacrifice  to  thy  body. 


1  or,  with  his  lights 


531 


Ilxll  hlfr*  JsJttJ  Pl-tPI*  tJJJBh  fahjfr  P-.P  hlPtfc 

I  Mhfej  jaai^aa  hi  b^&JK  ^afe  %  ja£ia£ 


llfell  U^b  w->P~»-  jitatetei?>^»iAhjh  bil? 

l  :iplE  JX&  ^bji  ^Jtii  bsixybhj  kifeit  lh  lie 


Ubn  PJ I >fpj  U±bb  bbi£  hbi2  kfeiui  PJIP^IPP^.  a 

i  Hjbme  mjnsj  :a^  :bbb  jab  syaa 


lUlltefeb  .IbSjh  feXhMh£2i±lb£  JJ±b£  iP^PXjbfrj 

i  bjifeiii  iabb  i>p>jkpib  ibib  ip?>»  a 

?  km 


lie\ll  fcSikiie  lb±b±b  MJbilb  bjltbsl  [hzk  :k  a  [hill 
i  Xbjbb  ik  k&'Mkk  ixa  uxu  aiabjsaae  y*  iba 


3HIJ  Oils  AIM  3HX  OX  SNIMAH 


MAN  DA  LA  TEN 

7.  O  Fire,  become  our  guardian  and  protector,  be¬ 
come  the  creator  of  our  growth  and  of  our  growth  the 
upholder,  O  mighty  One,  give  to  us  what  we  shall  give  as 
offerings  to  the  gods,  and  unfailing  our  bodies  deliver. 


Sukta  8 

TRISHIRA  TWASHTRA 

1.  The  Fire  journeys  on  with  his  vast  ray  of  intuition, 
the  Bull  bellows  to  earth  and  heaven;  he  has  reached  up 
to  the  highest  extremities  of  heaven,  the  mighty  one  has 
grown  in  the  lap  of  the  waters. 

2.  The  Bull  of  the  heights2,  the  new-born  rejoiced, 
the  unfailing  child  worker  rejoiced  and  shouted  aloud; 
in  the  formation  of  the  gods  he  does  his  exalted  works 
and  comes  the  first  in  his  own  abodes. 

3.  He  who  grasps  the  head  of  the  father  and  mother 
they  set  within  in  the  pilgrim-sacrifice,  a  sea  from  the 
Sun-world;  in  his  path  are  the  shining  rays  that  are 
the  foundations  Gf  the  Horse  of  Power  and  they  accept 
embodiment  in  the  native  seat  of  the  Truth. 

4.  O  shining  One,  thou  comest  to  the  front  of  dawn 
after  dawn,  thou  hast  become  luminous  in  the  Twins; 
thou  holdest  the  seven  planes  for  the  Truth  bringing 
Mitra  to  birth  for  thy  own  body. 


2  or,  the  humped-Bull, 


533 


II VII  'fefe  lth 

I  ItPIHh^PjlPP  khhjlfeS^hl^&b£j£ 


S^k 


ll?ll  :il±  yifej  IfttH  biS-mei  kbilafe  h*r|>P-ift  jn^iSfej 

I  aha&fctte  JbMke  khjgtbjlgfej  bjlbkbolbiibj  & 


II6UI  MJfe  bjlfeblie  inlbi  bjm  fr^b^bbj 

I  I'rtth  :b>ShJ  H^Ui  pfla-vjp^  1P&K  tan 


ll^ll  h^lPh^  h$p.  kfblglrj  jbfei  Myi  klhit  bjij 
I  :HJibl5J  afcH  :±JbbJ  Ltb  IHb  IM^b  IbK 


ll'bll  i^k  Mb  JbK  ^PPi^ihP  lble  mtt 

I  bj%  bmib  IJukb  JbS:  iblb  b££*fe  Mstibit 


7I1IIJ  OIJLSAW  3HA  OI,  S.MNAH 


MANDALA  TEN 

5.  Thou  becomest  the  eye  of  the  vast  Truth;  when 
thou  journeyest  to  the  Truth  thou  becomest  Varuna,  its 
guardian;  thou  becomest  the  child  of  the  waters,  O 
knower  of  all  things  born,  thou  becomest  the  messenger 
of  the  man  in  whose  offering  thou  hast  taken  pleasure. 


6.  Thou  art  the  leader  of  the  sacrifice  and  leader  to 
the  mid-world  to  which  thou  resortest  constandy  with 
thy  helpful  team  of  mares;  thou  upholdest  in  heaven 
thy  head  that  conquers  the  Sun-world,  thy  tongue  thou 
makest,  O  Fire,  the  carrier  of  our  offerings. 

7.  By  his  will  Trita  in  the  secret  cave  desiring  by  his 
movements  the  thinking  of  the  supreme  Father  cherished 
in  the  lap  of  the  Father  and  Mother,  speaking  the  com¬ 
panion-word,  seeks  his  weapons. 


8.  Trita  Aptya  discovered  the  weapons  of  the  Father 
and  missioned  by  Indra  went  to  the  battle;  he  smote 
the  Three-headed,  the  seven-rayed  and  let  loose  the 
ray-cows  of  the  son  of  Twashtri  the  form-maker. 


9.  Indra,  the  master  of  beings,  broke  that  great  up- 
striving  meditating  force  and  casted  downward  and 
making  his  own  the  ray-cows  of  Twashtri5 s  son  of  the 
universal  forms  he  took  away  from  him  his  three  heads. 


535 


I|V)II  rhjljfc  hjlhiik  Ibkk  hlh  kikit<aa.h  Jk  b^kbj 

I  tihahi  :hkh  kllkjlh^  b^bb  {bt»>  kjlbk 


MXll  Pl?ltr'>(j3  bk>IP^  k>]l?  ^blkk^b  pinb  y£kj  Jkfc 

I  ^hale  li±hi  :HhJkJlk.LlhJ  hl&fekj  hthj  ihjg  hi  hie 


llfcll  kkl*(fr  hlfeihj  >IP(£  k^k&k  UklPIt^b^lt^Ubb 
I  Jkhki  hkh  mJB£  Ihb^ltb  |Pkfa  ISk  feb-j  |h 


UhM  hjh^h  hj  Jhkls  :2ah£  Ik  ikll-t  Jk  klh  bjPjbjtg  hah  b^S 

I  :kk  Jl  §ih  ijh  £ik  b4i>P  llfih^b  h  lb-.>|bb-»kbh> 


II ^ II  k&3k  lh£Jk  &tek  JhhJh  h  Xhhj  lhh  Uakh  kfc  h  kSkj 
I  :htlfr>ffyte  lith  hjlhh  :khj  ihpk  pi  hah  lhh 


a 


3W  OIXSAW  HHX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


HAVIRDHANA  ANGI 

SUKTA  11 

1.  Mighty  from  the  mighty,  strong  and  inviolable,  he 
milked  by  the  milking  of  heaven  the  streams  of  the 
Indivisible;  Varuna  knew  all  by  his  right  thought.  A 
lord  of  sacrifice,  may  he  perform  the  order  of  the  rites 
of  the  sacrifice. 

2.  May  the  Gandharvi  speak  to  me  and  the  Woman 
born  from  the  Waters,  may  her  protection  be  around 
my  mind  midst  the  roar  of  the  river;  may  the  indivisible 
mother  establish  us  in  the  heart  of  our  desire :  my  brother 
the  greatest1  and  first  declares  it  to  me. 

3.  She  the  happy,  and  opulent  and  glorious,  dawn 
has  shone  out  for  man  bringing  the  Sun-world  with  her. 
When  they  gave  birth  to  this  Fire,  an  aspirant  doing  the 
will  of  the  aspirants  for  the  discovery  of  knowledge. 

4.  Now  the  Bird,  the  missioned  Hawk,  has  brought 
the  draught  of  the  great  and  seeing  wine  to  the  pilgrim- 
sacrifice.  When  the  Aryan  peoples  chose  the  doer  of 
works,  Fire  the  priest  of  the  call,  then  the  thought  is  born. 

5.  Ever  art  thou  delightful  like  grasses  to  that  which 
feeds  on  them,  O  Fire,  doing  well  with  thy  voices  of 
invocation  the  pilgrim-sacrifice  for  man  when  thou 
givest  utterance  to  the  plenitude  of  the  word  of  the 
illumined  sage,  as  one  who  has  conquered,  thou  comest 
with  thy  multitude. 


1  or,  the  eldest 


537 


8SG 


mil  kb  -Sh^K  PPr,&  MfelM?  k^Ph^b  |bfc 

I  IMPIPft  :bbit  %UskjslJ^3fe  %fejs  lbite  1  ii^ira 


a  *m 


ll^ll  :lJ2i  kyjfe  hblPIbbtfejlk  bEbjs  £fe  Jb  JJ£ 

l  kkfejb  bibbbfeX  JbSfe  feiteb  bib  tile  Jb  ysk 


ll?ll  P)P|j=  P-»kRb  fete  Jb  blit  |Mbb->  Pjnt'bSjb  fe  IP3V 
|  kl^h  IPfrb  hpfc  lfe|  Pjlbj+PjHjP  ifeii  Ptbb 


I  ISM  l  b£  fejbit  kibble  ittk  b  i>ktk>  (Mhkb  jbifeb  hi 
I  ^ote  h  b  b)K  ibb  :blb  ktete  pbb  Pjbfc  bite  b±b 


11^.11  Jbb  bhfe  ikfete  pirobJP^h  bbibfei  :^jb  bfejfefej 
I  bJiaS  bl  yibk  bjbbbjblt  lie  iite  i>Phj  bv^ 


3HIJ  OIXS'AIAi  3 HI  OX  SMPMAH 


| 


MANDALA  TEN 


6.  Upward  lift  the  Father  and  Mother;  the  lover 
aspires  to  his  enjoyment,  rejoicing  he  obeys  the  urgings 
from  his  heart:  a  bearer  of  the  word  he  speaks  and 
jocund  Jongs  for  the  good  work,  the  Mighty  One  puts 
forth  his  strength  and  is  illumined  by  the  Thought. 

7.  O  Fire,  O  son  of  Force,  the  mortal  who  attains  to 
thy  right  thinking  goes  forward  and  hears  the  truth 
beyond;  holding  the  impelling  force,  borne  by  the  horses 
of  power,  luminous  and  mighty  he  seeks  to  possess  the 
heavens. 


8.  When,  O  Fire,  takes  place  that  sacrificial  assembly, 
O  master  of  sacrifice,  the  assembly  divine  among  the 
gods,  when  thou  distributest  the  ecstasies,  O  lord  of 
nature,  an  opulent  portion  bring  to  us. 

9.  Hear  us,  O  Fire,  in  thy  house,  in  the  hall  of  thy 
session,  yoke  the  galloping  car  of  the  Immortal;  bring 
to  us  heaven  and  earth,  parents  of  the  gods;  let  none  of 
the  gods  be  away  from  us  and  mayst  thou  be  here. 


Sukta  12 

1.  Heaven  and  earth  are  the  first  to  hear  and  by  the 
Truth  become  possessed  of  the  true  speech  when  the 
god  fashioning  the  mortal  for  the  sacrificial  act  takes 
his  seat  as  his  priest  of  the  call  and  turned  towards  its 
own  force  moves  towards  it. 


539 


ll^n  PahP  Wb^kfc  ^bbh  y*  b4kb 

l  PJlPh  lh^llgj^  llt$£&&  JtllP  lr>PklkfcP.*kS 


uV)ii  pyie  jpip  hjhipii?  p  L^i^-cib^  yni>§i*  ihq  ^jp^jkkj 

1  P£  PJ  ^  JLbt£p  PP  PjSli^b^  |hpN  1UM>  |Kb-»j 


llxll  Wipy^l^j  l>Phj  jcJte  y±  lPaP  PhHPjy4k(blfe  bh  l£k> 
I  ^  yte.|>  Plflfe  yiklPLE  WPK  {hli^frb  Ik 


llfell  :JLP  PP  I22P}  \k%h  ^bi>fri?  y  PP  Pie  lk£  ^fcbj 
1  yep  P±PHP  \mp)i*  jpxyi  j \£h  P 


llhll  bn?y*fr  lb-ib  yppj  ipy*  ys^k  lfcpjp  :£%PJa 

I  bl b^<b|b-^JkbK  pa£  Jk  I^k  PP]bk>jh  Mb*>  |b^ 


mid  0IXSA1M  3HX  OX  SNKAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


2.  A  god  encompassing  the  gods  with  the  Truth, 
carry  our  offering,  the  first  to  awake  to  the  knowledge; 
erect,  thy  light  rises  by  the  kindling  with  smoke  for  thy 
banner;  thou  art  the  rapturous  eternal  priest  of  the  call 
strong  by  speech  for  the  sacrifice. 

3.  When  perfectly  achieved  is  the  immortality  of  the 
godhead,  the  immortality  of  the  Light,  men  born  in  this 
world  hold  wide  earth  and  heaven;  all  the  gods  follow 
in  the  track  of  that  sacrificial  act1  of  thine  when  the 
white  cow  is  milked  of  her  stream  of  divine  Light. 

4.  O  earth  and  heaven,  I  sing  to  you  the  word  of  illu¬ 
mination,  pouring  your  light  make  my  work  grow,  may 
the  two  firmaments  hear  me;  when  the  days  and  the 
heavens  have  come  by  the  guidance  of  the  force,  may 
the  Father  and  Mother  quicken  us  here  with  the  sweet¬ 
ness  of  the  wine. 

5.  On  something  in  us  the  king  has  laid  hold;  what 
have  we  done  that  transgresses  his  law  who  can  know? 
Even  if  the  Friend  is  dealing  crookedly  with  the  gods 
there  is  as  if  a  call  to  us  as  we  go,  there  is  upon  us  a 
plenitude. 

6.  Hard  to  seize  by  the  mind  in  this  world  is  the  name 
of  the  immortal  because  he  puts  on  features  and  becomes 
divergent  forms;  he  who  grasps  perfectly  with  his  mind 
and  his  thought  seizes  its  controlling  law,  him,  O  Fire, 
O  mighty  One,  undeviatingly  protect. 


1  or,  sacrificial  word 


a37 


541 


Ilxll  ftXfepfe  i  bibb?  JbiJ  XHM?  H  PJ>Bll>  JiSbJ  JbK 


(l£ll  kt>lnjte  bblTrt  I  bijbisb  P*mm.  gjybh'l  IHJitbt 


tlhll  :fe£&U*  btjbhb  Ub^fei^  bkte  JtBk 

I  kB^hS  fchj  Ikllt  tip) I?  lJelt  2^tktJJ£ 

mil  :J ih  bblb  hjle  y±  £h 

ofe  m 

I2&lh 

1£  (fchlMls  :£±ji 

IIVII  :lb£  ^>Jk  hkmib^«fcjm  k£b£  JbbJX  £b  Jb  lb 

I  itb^a  bibltktei  Ib&b  bibb  bbb  bb£  Jb  yj£s 


H?ll  Pk|fe  minfrfe  y^  ibbjlb  blltlb>bjbyble  y±  y£kj 
I  tbj  t?4khte  k  fta-lhl'H'.tfeb  bjbdb  ibb  bbijb 


1 16M l  ittPto  Jblb  Pipy*  iy»  bj&bJ2iibbbibjy2£  J&& 
I  y±fcili%  bbb  :bb±bbj  yiUblh  bbbj  Ibb  bbijb 


3313  OIXSAK  3HX  OX  SM1VAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


7.  The  discovery  of  knowledge  in  which  the  gods  find 
their  rapture  they  hold  in  the  house  of  the  radiant  sun; 
they  have  set  in  the  sun  its  light,  in  the  moon  its  rays  and 
both  circle  unceasingly  around  its  illumination. 

8.  The  thought  in  which  the  gods  meet  together,  when 
it  is  occult  we  know  not  of  it.  May  Mitra  and  the  indi¬ 
visible  mother  and  the  godhead  of  the  creative  sun 
declare  us  sinless  to  Varuna. 

9.  Hear  us,  O  Fire,  in  thy  house,  in  the  hall  of  thy 
session,  yoke  the  galloping  car  of  the  Immortal;  bring 
to  us  heaven  and  earth,  parents  of  the  gods;  let  none  of 
the  gods  be  away  from  us  and  mayst  thou  be  here. 

VIMADA  AINDRA  OR  PRAJAPATYA, 

OR  VASUKRIT  VASUKRA 

SUKTA  20 

1.  Bring  to  us  a  happy  mind. 

2.  I  pray  the  Fire,  the  friend  who  is  irresistible  in  his 
own  command,  in  whose  law  the  white  rays  attend  on  the 
Sun-world,  serve  the  teat  of  the  mother. 

3.  Fire  whom  face  to  face  a  home  of  light,  one  who 
brings  the  ray  of  intuition  by  his  lustre  they  increase; 
he  blazes  with  his  row  of  flaming  tusks. 

4.  He  comes  to  us  as  a  noble  path  for  men  when  he 
travels  to  the  ends  of  heaven ;  he  is  the  seer  and  he  lights 
up  the  sky1. 


1  or,  the  cloud. 


543 


no ^ n  yysjfi  lie  xiu 

I  :Jttjyj±£dhi±  mbli^kb  JiXtfeJ  tile  y  l^b 


ll'bll  H1M>  mtji£  jaAfatil^ 
I  Mb->n:h  yoys  krih  bile  y±lb  ya^ys  :ka& 


l?ll  :M±tefe  ihfcjS  kyis  I  :bi  JUK  bife  y  ktsX]  )>b)lk  %  h  m* 


lie\H  :§ibhibMfe  :£ie  |  t&te£  bysbS  bl  .plblkb 


ll^ll  Wp^h(j»h»  u=y  byte  I  PJ^llt  Mby2ate  :tebJtyS  Utte  %  b 


llV)ii  yjh  i£  Edte  kfejbj  l  teb  i  !=>■»- m teayabklt  .Iba&bte 
3313  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNPVAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


5.  Accepting  the  oblation  of  man  he  stands  high  exalted 
in  the  sacrifice,  a  skilful  craftsman;  he  goes  in  our  front 
building  our  home. 

6.  He  is  our  secure  foundation,  he  is  our  offering,  he 
is  the  sacrifice;  his  path  goes  swiftly  to  its  goal:  the  gods 
call  Fire  with  its  adze. 

7.  I  desire  from  the  Fire,  powerful  for  the  sacrifice  the 
work  of  the  supreme  bliss;1  they  speak  of  him  as  the 
living  son  of  the  stone2. 


8.  Whatever  men  are  with  us  may  they  in  all  ways 
abide  in  happiness  making  the  Fire  to  grow  by  the 
offerings. 

9.  Black  is  his  movement  and  white  and  luminous  and 
crimson-red,  it  is  large  and  straight  and  glorious;  golden 
of  form  the  father  brought  into  being. 


10.  So,  O  Fire,  rapturous3  thou  bearest  thy  thinking 
mind,  O  son  of  energy,  companioning  the  immortals, 
coming  to  us  thou  bearest  thy  words  and  thy  right  think¬ 
ings,  thou  bringest  impelling  force,  energy,  happy  worlds 
of  habitation,  all. 


1  or,  the  work  that  brings  the  supreme  bliss; 

2  or,  of  the  Rock,  or  the  Peak. 

3  or,  Vimada,  the  rapturous  one,  coining  carries  to  thee,  O  Fire, 
his  thinking  mind,  to  thee  his  words  and  his  right  thinkings,  brings  etc. 


545 


9*S 


fckUS  JtyiteS  IkSkJ  Sk  lk  kj  IkiUSfe  kj&k  ki 
I  ^kaJkkJS  kiSk^Jkillik  Jki 


Kbll  Jil&kkj  4b±kfe  Mitk  4kty  %k  4k  *y  4fk>kkj  yilibit 
I  [hMUp  kJikkSjkkJ  ikkkle  UjlPktjK: 


11*11  4&&kk4  llh  lkkkj  kkk  ^b(ky  kPIftPIfc  Ik  JJttM 

I  tekKk.m^P  kjl  kk±k  ktkk 


nkll  k^kkj  kkj  yusj  hjie  IkSkJ  kl±  ik  kj  ibkfcolh^  1M& 
I  :i*j§te  £ki±e  in^hia  Q 

llhll  4£±%kkJkjllK:  kilkJ4£3k  kk  4k  kj  4kk4ibklki 

I  :akl.»»frkRiik  :kklk*  k  klki 

mil  klSkkJ  kkyij^klh  AJIS  kk  4k  kj  k^ymki  kikk 

I  |k4ink  lki  ijuylkjkkjkki  k  kijiie 

^  km 


3>II3  OIXSAW  3HX  OJ.  S.MNAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


SUKTA  21 

1 .  By  our  self-purifications  we  elect  thee,  the  Fire  as  our 
priest  of  the  call,  for  the  sacrifice  where  strewn  is  the  grass, 
— in  the  intoxication  of  your  rapture, — intense  with  thy 
purifying  light  of  flame — and  thou  growest  to  greatness. 

2.  Those  who  have  achieved  possession  of  Horse,  are 
very  close  to  thee  and  glorify  thee ;  the  ladle  goes  to  thee, — 
in  the  intoxication  of  your  rapture, — direct,  carrying  the 
oblation,  O  Fire, — and  thou  growest  to  greatness. 

3.  In  thee  the  upholding  laws  reside;  sprinkling  out 
their  contents  as  with  ladle  black  forms  and  white — in  the 
intoxication  of  your  rapture — all  glories  thou  holdest — 
and  thou  growest  to  greatness. 

4.  O  forceful  and  immortal  Fire,  whatever  wealth 
thou  deemest  fit,  that  for  the  winning  of  the  plenitudes 
— in  the  intoxication  of  your  rapture, — bring  to  us  a  wealth 
of  various  lights  in  the  sacrifices, — and  thou  growest  to 
greatness. 

5.  The  Fire  born  from  Atharvan  knows  all  seer- 
wisdoms,  he  becomes  the  messenger  of  the  luminous  sun, 
— in  the  intoxication  of  your  rapture — dear  and  desirable 
to  the  lord  of  the  law — and  thou  growest  to  greatness. 

6.  Thee  they  pray  in  the  sacrifices,  O  Fire,  as  the  pil¬ 
grim-sacrifice  goes  on  its  way;  all  desirable  treasures — in 
the  intoxication  of  your  rapture — thou  foundest  for  the 
giver,  and  thou  growest  to  greatness. 


547 


m 


lifelike  tMjk  .tohhlhkMbbiJb  BJJ£l  Ibi  b*kk 
I  Vfr**  kite  JbkJ  b£  itekkkdbkite  tlnhk  Ilk  |kte 


llbll  fe^uwMte  kb  pnp  ifrgjb  lMt  hih  klk  £  ikbj 
I  ik^fi  iPHbj  Mb  ^  ltebj  bjlbb  ibb  kite  ^  ItfebJ 


II ^  n  :jblbi  £U£  kb  kibihjtetete  llukk  £jhl?)kk 
I  -ibbuutN  >jh  b|PSj  khXLk^te  tete  i±bK  >jh^bkj 


Vift 

skYu^im QB±k 

H?U  ^tebbj  kkjlte  bjlbb  tek  bk  ^b  bj  liklkb  kkkfekjte 
I  Mb  Jibbis  k^bbjtte  MUS  kite 


II6MI  ^bbjkjtek2akjb  sfclk  £J±  lb  bj  Ibkk  iyitekb 
I  hbjb  kj  p>ki>ib  tebijkitete  ilk 


3^13  DIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNHAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


7.  Thee  as  the  priest  of  the  rite  in  the  sacrifices  men 
have  seated,  O  Fire,  beautiful,  luminous  of  front, — in 
the  intoxication  of  your  rapture — bright  and,  with  thy 
eyes,  most  conscious  of  knowledge — and  thou  growest  to 
greatness. 

8.  O  Fire,  with  thy  bright  light  of  flame  thou  spreadest 
the  wide  Vast,  clamouring  thou  becomest  the  bull — in 
the  intoxication  of  your  rapture — and  settest  the  child  of 
the  womb  in  the  sisters — and  thou  growest  to  greatness. 


VATSAPRI  BHALANDANA 
Sukta  45 

1 .  Above  heaven  was  the  first  birth  of  the  Fire,  over  us 
was  his  second  birth  as  the  knower  of  all  things  born,  his 
third  birth  was  in  the  waters,  a  god-mind;  him  conti¬ 
nuously  one  kindles  and  with  one’s  thought  perfectly  fixed 
on  him  adores. 

2.  O  Fire,  we  know  the  triple  three  of  thee,  we  know 
thy  seats  borne  widely  in  many  planes,  we  know  thy 
supreme  Name  which  is  in  the  secrecy,  we  know  that  front 
of  things  whence  thou  earnest. 

3.  He  of  the  god-mind  kindled  thee  in  the  Ocean, 
within  the  Waters,  he  of  the  divine  vision  kindled  thee, 
O  Fire,  in  the  teat  of  heaven;  the  mighty  ones  made  thee 
to  grow  where  thou  stoodest  in  the  third  kingdom,  in 
the  lap  of  the  waters. 


549 


tag  ±t]si£aie  ttofe  xats  at  a  is 

I  U>kU»blA  hSs^&SH  5JElc^  JSiC  Kill 


U?u  :lP>fc  Pkl-^lfc  kfrt?kj|hgfekle  ^H>ktjl£ 
I  :blfek  iitej  :ktkbk?  kuSte  UfM£  itXX  filial 


iisnii  kv^khjm  msyui.  ir.'feSi.lfayn  Mbtiih  tajus 

I  fcjlls  ^k^ktj^Pk  Ujtjg  :i^ils  ^felh  ££}£. 


ll^ll  fa-gh  u»U'kkktpk  iktt^H|>h  J^kjfcjyitfej  22JK 

|  :klk>?l^llrihH>  JiifeJi.  lie  itli  tekte|tfe%  HikifeJ 


||V)H  :uihkjrnta^  K>KPik  Jsj  l>M>  gale  :ki±  :gfe 

I  :ih|lttaa  : Kbits  tklh^kk  Unlhi.  Jlnkfe  Jid^gllnllSs 


Hxlt  ~PJ^lk  Ikklk  ISt^ae  tS*bj^  (kittle  tJ2K 

I  litchi>  :h»i>^>j^  min?  :jys  bKjhPK>  : H r) jELfeateig 


ama  oixsaw  xhx  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  TEN 


4.  Fire  cried  aloud  like  heaven  thundering,  he  licked 
the  earth  revealing  its  growths:  when  kindled  and  born, 
at  once  he  saw  all  this  that  is;  he  shines  out  with  his  light 
between  earth  and  heaven. 

5.  An  exalter  of  glories,  a  holder  of  the  riches,  a  mani- 
fester  of  thinking  mind,  a  guardian  of  the  wine  of  delight, 
a  shining  One,  the  son  of  force,  the  king  in  the  Waters,  he 
grows  luminous  as  he  burns  up  in  the  front  of  the  dawns. 

6.  The  ray  of  intuition  of  the  universe,  the  child  in  the 
womb  of  the  world,  in  his  coming  to  birth  he  filled  earth 
and  heaven;  going  beyond  them  he  rent  even  the  strong 
mountain  when  the  peoples  of  the  five  births  sacrificed 
to  the  fire. 

7.  An  aspirant  and  traveller  and  wise  of  mind,  a  puri¬ 
fying  flame,  the  Fire  who  is  set  within  as  the  immortal  in 
mortals,  he  sends  forth  and  carries  a  ruddy  smoke  striving 
with  his  bright  flame  of  light  to  reach  heaven. 

8.  Visible,  golden  of  light,  widely  he  shone;  resplen¬ 
dent  in  his  glory  he  is  life  hard  to  violate :  the  Fire  by  his 
expandings  became  immortal  when  heaven  with  its  strong 
seed  had  brought  him  to  birth. 

9.  O  god,  O  happy  light,  O  Fire,  he  who  has  prepared 
for  thee  the  luminous  honeycomb1  him  lead  forward 
towards  a  more  opulent  state,  O  youthful  godhead,  even 
to  the  bliss  enjoyed  by  the  gods. 


1  or,  the  cake  of  light 


551 


Kill  ip^a.>jnjjku  ijMtjkuuPb.  i$u 

I  khi  kiah  .sab  k  kh  bibb  liile  |jkfc»bj  k& 


Hill  :ihbb  ^JBkJ  bjkb  ipj»?  bjlite  £  b  frjib.  jbbja 
I  b->hklh?MJ>  llbkb^Hb  kl$k  IPlUv  IP)S  is 


^8  kh'h 


iikiiik^afe  m3  iaa  j±%1  ^bjhifriis  hsio 

I  :i±4Ui±ib  :KJJapfe  >kibtb  (bitfi 


Hi  ill  :kfe  aj  yaiyitbiJajb  &a  ikikwa.kjif.bjg  M  ihb> 
I  injlbia  ^teji  £fe  lasaj  i±£  kle  ibliUab  kfkifco 


llo in  rb^kjb'X'Sbkkj  kbife^lbk.  ibjJte  buy  tH  :bKJ 

I  HhfrHS  klf.  lie  tefe£Jxfe£  Mt  b  IK 


3>II;I  OIXSAIAI  3HX  OX  SNNAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


10.  O  Fire,  bestow  on  him  his  share  in  the  things  of 
inspired  knowledge,  in  word  upon  word  as  it  is  spoken: 
he  becomes  dear  to  the  sun,  dear  to  Fire;  upward  he  breaks 
with  what  is  born  in  him,  upward  with  the  things  that 
are  to  be  born. 

11.  O  Fire,  men  who  sacrifice  to  thee  day  after  day  hold 
in  themselves  all  desirable  riches;  desiring  the  treasure  in 
thy  companionship,  aspiring,  they  burst  open  the  covered 
pen  of  the  Ray-Cows. 

12.  The  Fire  has  been  affirmed  in  their  lauds  by  the 
sages,  he  who  is  full  of  bliss  for  men,  the  Universal  God¬ 
head,  guardian  of  the  wine  of  delight.  Let  us  invoke 
earth  and  heaven  free  from  hostile  powers;  found  in  us, 
O  gods,  a  wealth  full  of  hero-mights. 


Sukta  46 

1.  The  great  priest  of  the  call  has  been  born;  the 
knower  of  the  heavens,  he  who  is  seated  in  man,  may  he 
take  his  seat  in  the  lap  of  the  waters :  he  who  upholds  us 
and  who  is  held  in  us,  rules  for  thee  his  worshipper  thy 
exp  endings  and  thy  riches  and  is  the  protector  of  thy 
body. 

2.  They  worshipped  him  in  the  session  of  the  waters, 
as  if  the  cow  of  vision  lost  they  followed  him  by  his  tracks; 
where  he  hid  in  the  secret  cavern,  aspiring  with  obeisance 
the  Flame-Seers,  the  wise  thinkers  desired  and  found 
him. 


553 


II6UI  b  |^hn>-k  (mMfeS  :i?P(Pb£J 

I  tltbblh  :i2liiie  (PIWS‘bK>  IK>jmhi> 


n^n  it  ub^^hiinkh^j  itSti  mtltH  :me 

I  (Bfeljh  kbJttmi  :mfej  bj 


UV)||  kfcbte  l^blb  W>jilte  bbj  ibb  Hil  IP-hk 
I  hif^b  ilttie  iXh  li^hJEj  lib  b±b£h  is 


iixii  bbhib  *bi=.b  lit^i  ftfeih  P]>EEn$bifctej 

|  kllf.lVbib-MPP  £h  b^lK  :bj^±b  ^ttJH>IP(l  Sih 


ufen  tiiktu  bjbb  ifektjib  hh-ti  m  mu*  mks  b 

I  rlhlh^h^feH  Jbkttte  P«a.bjb*bjhb  mfej  hi 


a>nj  oixsaw  am  ox  snhah 


MANDALA  TEN 


3.  Him  greatly  desiring  Trita,1  son  of  the  master  of 
wide  riches,  found  on  the  head  of  the  light  unslayable; 
he  is  born  the  youth  who  increases  the  felicity  in  our 
mansions  and  becomes  the  navel-centre  of  the  luminous 
world. 

4.  In  their  aspiration  they  created  him  by  their  obei¬ 
sance  and  set  him  in  men  as  the  rapturous  priest  of  the 
call,  the  sacrificer  ever-moving  forward,  the  leader  of 
the  pilgrim-sacrifices,  the  traveller,  the  carrier  of  the 
offering,  the  purifying  Flame. 

5.  He  has  come  into  being  and  leading  him  like  a 
golden-maned  war-horse,  the  great,  the  victorious,  the 
founder  of  the  Light,  men  ignorant  one  who  is  free  from 
ignorance,  the  render  of  the  cities,  the  child  of  the  forests, 
whose  wealth  is  the  illumined  word2 — they  established  the 
thought. 

6.  May  Trita  in  the  homesteads  holding  all  firmly3 
take  his  session  in  his  native  seat  within  and  all-encom¬ 
passing;  thence,  a  dweller  in  man’s  home,  taking  all  into 
his  grasp,  by  a  wide  law  of  his  action,  by  unrestrained 
movements  he  journeys  to  the  gods. 

7.  His  ageless  and  purifying  fires  are  the  defenders  of 
our  homes,  lifting  their  luminous  smoke;  white-flaming, 
dwellers  in  the  Tree,  they  are  our  strengtheners  and 
supporters  and  like  winds  and  like  wine. 


1  Trita  the  triple  born  Irom  the  All-pervading  Substance. 

2  or,  the  illumination 

8  or,  setting  himself  firmly 


555 


Ilhll  :ibtbjP>»P.>bu>j  nn?»bikpj  $ibk 

I  feMhfrh  UrJi2  l^'P  jj  Jfc  H  :t+P<b  H?bb  JJj  ^ 


llill:<feh  ^  |b-.p->bbPiu>  tiK  y  ibJshfch*  ibtbj 
I  thlhltj^bjK  :P?3jbjlPK^mbP  » bj b->  b->Sp  P^P 


m 

:<fel£4£  :jyi£ 


llo^ll  :jfe£  ijj  £  :HiSJ2  pf?b^  is  :ifc  Ul£  EfeSi  PtfeblW  H 
I  ilJ^J2  mi  Mill!  lMlikE  plbb^  ^J3jj£  Ibft  |jx>  h 


\\\U  kfei£J2  bPhttPP->lbb  lbt>JPIH  itfeis 
I  h  {hkk  I2^mm22kjin  ^hhjh  kijhh  IME 


n?ll  k£al£jJ2  ^tej£  >.IMi  Sih.  ifeklh  p-^bfc  :bhihP 
I  :1JQM^L  lUMi  PJIPbb  is  :i±tjle  (hb  Ib^UJ  is 


3HIJ  OUSAH  3HX  Ol  SNWAH 


M  AND  ALA  TEN 


8.  Fire  carries  with  his  tongue  the  illumination  of 
wisdom,  he  carries  in  his  consciousness  earth’s  discoveries 
of  knowledge ;  him  men  hold  the  illuminating  and  puri¬ 
fying  rapturous  priest  of  the  call  most  strong  for  sacrifice. 


9.  This  is  the  Fire  to  whom  earth  and  heaven  gave 
birth;  and  the  waters,  the  form-maker  and  the  Flame- 
Seers  by  their  strengths  and  life  that  grows  in  the  mother 
and  the  gods  have  fashioned  for  man  desirable,  first  and 
supreme,  a  master  of  sacrifice. 

10.  Thou  art  he  whom  the  gods  have  set  as  the  carrier 
of  the  offerings  and  men  with  their  many  desires  as  the 
lord  of  sacrifice;  so  do  thou,  O  Fire,  found  in  thy  jour¬ 
neying  wide  expansion  for  him  who  lauds  thee  and 
making  him  divine  gather  in  him  many  glorious  things. 


Sukta  51 

1.  Large  was  the  covering  and  it  was  dense  in  which 
thou  wert  wrapped  when  thou  didst  enter  into  the  waters; 
one  was  the  god  who  saw  thee  but  many  and  manifold 
were  thy  bodies  which  he  saw,  O  Fire,  O  knower  of  all 
things  born. 

2.  Which  of  the  gods  was  he  who  saw  everywhere  my 
bodies  in  many  forms?  O  Mitra  and  Varuna,  where 
then  dwell  all  the  blazings  of  the  Fire  which  are  paths 
of  the  gods? 


a38 


557 


8SS 


ll?tl  :U£^  feitikliOhtiys:  ihib.  ph 

l  itklk  JJajy£  pM^iwbit  feilMhXie  ^  Iiimwk 


ll€Ml  laisS  Jiitt  jMkh^kkS  pji£b  ifeie 

I  Ufra>j  j±  JUteJB  p>frh  Vk^kitg  P4k£ 


ll^ll  :IMb£  p'bjv^p-.to  Ji  ^  hlkV%  lftt>b  Ib’g-jlk-^D 
I  p^teJs  {}.mt  je£  :kii£ 


l|V)||  rkIkkfcUkfc  k]lhs$  £h  Hklkbja  :&h  klkS 

I  kiinift  Hji±M  ii^^oki^akkbbLk  ^jVi 


11*11  Xpjh^lP^kJ  k  hliHb  i^pjkj  u?.kn  |fc-»P  p 

I  :ik^  JS.KPbX  li±  plbh+bj  lr.»b  $blfc($ 


HfeU  kklkk^PJblhQi>P»ll!!b  (klkkEJL)u>pjtc  (kn  ib-  p 
I  tthiSLkps  r^PPit*  ih§b  ifei  Jilfiab 


3313  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


3.  We  desire  thee,  O  Fire,  O  knower  of  all  things 
born,  when  thou  hast  entered  manifoldly  into  the  growths 
of  the  earth  and  into  the  waters ;  there  the  lord  of  the 
law  grew  aware  of  thee,  O  thou  of  the  many 
diverse  lights,  shining  luminous  beyond  the  ten  inner 
dwelling  places. 

4.  O  Varuna,  fearing  the  sacrificants’  office  that  so 
the  gods  might  not  yoke  me  to  that  work;  so  my  bodies 
entered  manifoldly,  for  I,  Fire,  was  not  conscious  of 
this  goal  of  the  movement. 

5.  Come  to  us;  the  human  being,  god-seeking  is 
desirous  of  sacrifice,  he  has  made  all  ready  but  thou 
dwellest  in  the  darkness,  O  Fire.  Make  the  paths  of  the 
journeying  of  the  gods  easy  to  travel,  let  thy  mind  be  at 
ease,  carry  the  offerings. 

6.  The  ancient  brothers  of  the  Fire  chose  this  goal  to 
be  reached  as  charioteers  follow  a  path;  therefore  in  fear 
I  came  far  away,  O  Varuna.  I  started  back  as  a  gaur 
from  the  bow-string  of  the  archer. 

7.  Since  we  make  thy  life  imperishable,  O  Fire,  O 
knower  of  all  things  born,  so  that  yoked  with  it  thou 
shalt  not  come  to  harm,  then  with  thy  mind  at  ease 
thou  canst  carry  their  share  of  the  offering  to  the  gods, 
O  high-born  Fire. 

8.  Give  me  the  absolutes  that  precede  and  follow  the 
sacrifice  as  my  share  of  the  oblation  packed  with  the 
energy;  give  me  the  light  from  the  waters  and  the  soul 
from  the  plants  and  let  there  be  long  life  for  the  Fire, 
O  gods. 


559 


099 


NxN  ^  J5X&1  lbJfc^  ifeLk  ihP4j  :jb  j£ 

I  JsibL  ££  H  £±Jte  i?4i±j£  (Pcaj|kbK  \&>  & 


llfen  :lfe  JJais  5fi  £  &}£  &U2  h  kfcjbi*  ^>XtJ  H  £ 

I  :JtL^Jb±  ktK:  &y±£  :^Jbt[6  ft>.^frhT»fr  ^ 

nhw  g&|>  feS  b&  bish  fe}  ibbjfr  P§iPPb 

I  hhr’tj  h*P-»Pb.  WkPft  J±fe£  b^bfch.tbbUtkPb 

II ill  ktlkfe}£  Jilfc  |P§lP^b  £b±£  iiie  (jfcbj  IbkjS  |bh 
I  :M^i£  Un>fi  riijynis  y±Lte  jifclft  h^bth-robu^  isp 

"bb  a»& 

:JBr h£lh 


II^H  l£±hk  £-*>-►  b|U:b  U»lbP 

I  IJLkUtt  ikte  \£±h±&'£  fr.fr!  frlbbta  J_fccvjj2iS 


3HId  OLLSAW  3HX  OX  SNJMAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


9.  Thine  be  the  absolute,  precedents  and  consequents 
of  the  sacrifice,  the  portions  packed  with  energy  of  the 
oblation;  thine,  O  Fire,  be  all  this  sacrifice;  may  the 
four  regions  bow  down  to  thee. 


SUMITRA  VADHRYASHWA 
Sukta  69 

1 .  Happy  are  the  seeings  of  the  Fire  of  the  gelded  Horse, 
pleasurable  his  guidance,  delightful  his  approaches;  when 
the  friendly  peoples  set  him  ablaze  in  their  front,  fed  with 
the  oblations  of  the  Light  he  flames  up  for  his  worshipper. 

2.  The  Light  is  the  increasing  of  the  Fire  of  the  gelded 
Horse,  Light  is  his  food,  Light  is  his  fattening:  fed  with 
the  oblation  of  the  Light  wide  he  spread;  he  shines  as  the 
Sun  when  there  is  poured  on  him  its  running  stream. 

3.  The  force  of  flame  which  thinking  man,  which  the 
friendly  one,  set  ablaze,  this  is  that  new  force,  O  Fire; 
so  opulently  shine,  so  accept  our  words,  so  take  the 
plenitude  by  violence,  so  found  here  the  inspired 
knowledge. 

4.  That  flame  of  thine  of  old  which  the  gelded  Horse, 
when  prayed,  set  blazing  high,  O  Fire  who  art  that 
flame,  this  too  accept ;  as  that  flame,  become  the  protector 
of  our  stable  erections  and  the  protector  of  our  bodies, 
guard  this  giving  of  thine  which  is  here  in  us. 


561 


II^U  bi  kbbs  lityjbtlk  Sahii  kb 

i  is  bifc£3ife  bmljn  ie^pip  ibke  ^  V»jite% 


II7II  :&Jbb£  Jibsljhjbbjb  fcii^yblintejfekjb  bi 
I  kkfeH  ippp  fepnxps^Pii*  LtiiS  :kte  ^ 


lie\U  hlfhjS  :p.lith*Ithjb  Sjhfi  klitB: 

I  lb*3fe 


U\\\  :lba  Hj>hiPPh  IJiUbte  Jbbbasliiab  bl  i.l£ 

I  feuitj  ifrihMfcfc  mib  kj&b  Itebh  lb-tehtt 


|V)||  hlh  bifeife&lb  b.lb  b  is  :bi±jfi  :bbba&jnab  bS  >.li 
I  W)PiPP'PjikPjb]>.lP  ibi  jj±  ihjb  bJbSbJblb  PbaE  ibh 


3HI3  0I1SAJM  3HA  OX  SMJAIAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


5.  Become  full  of  light,  O  gelded  Horse,  and  become 
our  protector,  let  not  the  assault  of  men  pierce  thee; 
thou  art  like  a  hero,  a  violent  overthrower  and  the  good 
Friend:  lo,  I  have  uttered  the  names  of  the  Fire  of  the 
gelded  Horse. 

6.  Thou  hast  conquered  the  riches  of  the  plains  and 
the  riches  of  the  mountain,  the  destroyer  foemen,  and 
the  Aryan  freemen:  like  a  hero  art  thou,  a  violent  over¬ 
thrower  of  men,  O  Fire,  mayst  thou  overcome  those  who 
battle  against  us. 

7.  This  Fire  is  the  long  Thread,  the  vast  Bull,  one  with 
a  thousand  layers  and  a  hundred  leadings,  he  is  the 
Craftsman;  luminous  in  men  luminous,  made  bright  by 
the  hands  of  men,  may  he  flame  out  in  the  strivers  after 
godhead,  in  the  friendly  people1. 

8.  In  thee  is  the  good  milch-cow,  O  knower  of  all 
things  born,  as  if  unstayingly  equal  in  its  yield,  giving 
its  nectar-milk.  O  Fire,  thou  art  set  alight  by  men  who 
have  the  intuitive  judgment,  strivers  after  godhead,  the 
friendly  people. 

9.  Even  the  immortal  gods  proclaim  thy  greatness,  O 
knower  of  all  things  born,  O  Fire  of  the  gelded  Horse. 
That  which  I  sought  by  questioning,  coming  to  the 
human  peoples,  thou  hast  conquered  by  men  who  grow 
by  thee2. 


1  in  the  Sumitras,  the  name  of  the  Rishi;  but  throughout  the  hymn  there  is 
a  double  or  symbolic  meaning  in  the  names. 

*  or,  who  make  thee  grow  in  them. 


563 


Ilhtl  tt)a£  :h>p Jt.-t%%  JttM  ibhii  JJr«h  b->P>- 
I  :bt>Hjtv£btbj  imfr)>P  Sib  ^ibtvmPlb^  lie 


tun  Ih*frb&  IP^fi  tit  J&aJttlMjte  |ikJSj£  :lt2tjfc  kbit 
I  hJPIPft  J^iS  £iti22%itk  iiitm  fail?  i±  lit? 


06\  £& 


uUn  t&sxiut  mtis  2aiy  bjbynif^  it  tk^nmis  it  & 

I  :hilbh(PHP  l£;_5  kubJdb  llfei  titifeK  EhtJitbK 


nun  ktSJhlbhjhBtblt  ts^Utt^jltttj  thb 
I  :^~JbP|PpS  hinitjpju  Uklfc  b^bfcb.fobPjjabfclfc 


no  in  ktijttmttis  jt£  lyaatjt  biyn  mjk  mnak 
iktbn  rtiteXst  kiblti  tibkktJHtS  tpjy 


3HIJ  OIXSAN  3HX  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  TENt 


10.  Thee  as  the  father  carries  his  son  in  his  lap  so  the 
gelded  Horse  carried  and  tended  thee,  O  Fire;  O  youthful 
god,  accepting  his  fuel  thou  didst  conquer  even  the 
supreme  and  mighty. 


11.  Fire  has  ever  conquered  the  enemies  of  the  gelded 
Horse  by  men  who  have  pressed  the  Soma  wine;  O  thou 
of  the  bright  diverse  lights,  thou  hast  broken  and  cast 
down  the  foe  that  was  equal  and  the  foe  that  was  mighty 
and  thou  hast  given  him  increase. 


12.  This  Fire  is  the  slayer  of  the  enemies  of  the  gelded 
Horse  lit  from  of  old  and  to  be  invoked  with  obeisance; 
so  do  thou  assail  those  who  attack  him  both  the  uncom- 
panioned  and  the  one  with  many  companions,  O  Fire 
of  the  gelded  Horse. 


SUKTA  70 

1.  O  Fire,  accept  the  fuel  I  give  thee;  in  the  seat  of 
revelation  take  joy  in  the  luminous  Thought:  on  the 
high  top  of  earth,  in  the  brightness  of'  the  days,  become 
high  uplifted  by  worship  of  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  O 
strong  of  will! 


2.  May  he  who  travels  in  front  of  the  gods,  he  who 
voices  the  godhead,  come  here  with  his  horses  of  universal 
forms;  pure  and  most  divine,  may  he  hasten  with  our 
obeisance  on  the  path  of  the  Truth  to  the  gods. 


565 


99? 


ll?ll  ^hPb  jgjiajJaS  JfefejS  ttra»Ah 

I  ktyii  :fe  lfeSfe  fei^i  lie  Wife  Ifc^J 


lievll  Wlb.frb  IhlnbJS  l>W£pj  klijie  fefe  IP'fr>jfelP.ftjl>.£ 
I  b->hap&jh*ihib  ibKj  :9*fejtt  :fer}Sj&  Ifeiti  Jfe3!£ 


ll^ll  fcibfe  bfe£  Siijfe  Ji£  feilSfe  1P1££  lllfe^  ife  lie 
I  mw  fej.  |P*P  IPNMftlbP  ^aiSj£  lifeljl  mij  mi 


llV)||  kfe^feiifefefei  fei  fei£jl*ii  ife%fe 
I  kwfete  fej  mfctfe  ife  ifeefejh  rfelife  WisLi  few  ife  JfeiJ 


lUUlfelfe^  ISJfe  Jfelife  i<?gh*S*>j£jB>  fei  Ifefeit  lfe£2|ie 
I  feifeik  fej>.£  IhnlP  bli  lfe-t>PJ  2sWfe|  lfefefe  fej 


nfen  mm  tj  isjfe  pm^;<;iph>  iub£  mwss^jfe 
I  fefeijie  Jfelfeafeit  |P4nfej£  mifeS 


a>na  ousAK  am  ox  snwah 


MANDALA  TEN 

3.  Men  bringing  their  offerings  ask  for  the  Fire  ever¬ 
lasting  to  be  their  envoy:  so  do  thou  with  thy  horses 
strong  to  bear  and  thy  swiftly  moving  car  bring  to  us 
the  gods;  take  here  thy  seat  as  the  priest  of  the  call. 

4.  May  seat  acceptable  to  the  gods  spread  wide  in 
us  and  all  its  long  horizontal  length  become  fragrant. 
Occupy  that  seat,  O  god,  with  a  mind  not  inclining  to 
wrath,  and  to  the  gods  with  Indra  for  their  greatest 
offer  sacrifice. 

5.  Touch  either  heaven’s  superior  peak  or  swing  wide 
open  with  all  the  extent  of  earth,  O  doors  of  aspiration, 
who  desire  the  chariot  of  the  gods,  hold  in  your  greatness 
and  by  the  great  the  divine  car. 

6.  Let  the  two  divine  daughters  of  heaven,  formed 
beautifully,  dawn  and  night,  sit  in  their  native  seat;  O 
dawn  and  night,  O  you  who  aspire,  may  the  gods 
aspiring  sit  on  your  wide  lap,  O  blissful  ones. 

7.  High  stands  up  the  stone  of  the  pressing,  high  the 
Fire  is  kindled,  may  it  touch  the  vast  and  the  seats  dear 
to  us  in  the  lap  of  the  infinite  mother;  O  you  who  are 
vicars  and  ordinants  of  the  rite  in  this  sacrifice,  you 
twain  who  have  greater  knowledge,  may  you  win  for  us 
by  sacrifice  the  Treasure. 

8.  O  ye  three  goddesses,  sit  on  the  superior  seat  which 
we  have  made  delightful  for  you;  may  the  mother  of 
Revelation  and  the  two  goddesses  with  the  luminous 
feet  accept  our  firmly  placed  offerings  and  our  human 
worship  of  sacrifice. 


567 


899 


uhu  i-Jiy  bjibbb 


i±  bibalbie 


PJiPfr  lbUteJ  JbjftlvbjK:  yabfelibljbj  lib 


ll^ll  :liblt  Ibbib  IbJT^bjK:  b  bitbj  bl  ibib 

I  febj.  S^bbi  i&bihbbiljb  Iblh  IrtHbShlE 

to  m 

It  JLHtlMfe^ 

‘It  <iblBrfe  :<fcJt4^  :iyK 


uUll  hUbfrblli  lbbie  ib£  ilibi  :ibkJ2  lie  bibjljb  £±bm 
I  ph4)>jp^  mih  IbbJ  £iS  b  baahjbkb  lb  bills 

I 

HoJm±  bl  \bt>jhibna  Ibbbajbgblng  :bb  bjlbbi 
I  bUb)  ifcjb  hb  Jfelh  Iblbb  lbfebj  IbblSi  ^hibb 


mil  :bil£  :bynbj.5  ISJb  HSHPbJ  IS  hb  felh  lblb%  b 
i  :Jttl£R  5th2zh± 


3W  OIXSAPY  3HX  OX  SNPMAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


9.  O  divine  maker  of  forms,  since  thou  hast  reached 
beauty  in  thy  works,  since  thou  hast  become  companion 
in  thy  being  to  the  Angirasa  seers,  forward  then  to  the 
goal  of  the  journeyings  of  the  gods,  for  thou  knowest  it! 
Aspiring,  perfect  in  ecstasy,  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  O 
giver  of  the  treasure. 

10.  O  Tree,  knowing  the  goal  of  the  journeyings  of  the 
gods,  bear  us  to  it  binding  with  the  radiant  cord.  May 
the  godhead  fashion  the  offerings  in  which  he  takes 
pleasure:  may  heaven  and  earth  protect  our  call. 

11.  O  Fire,  bring  Varuna  to  our  sacrifice,  Indra  from 
heaven,  the  Life-Gods  from  mid-air;  may  all  the  lords  of 
sacrifice  sit  on  our  sacred  seat,  may  the  immortal  gods 
take  rapture  in  the  Swaha. 


AGNI  SAUCHIKA  OR  VAISHWANARA 
OR  SAPTI  VAJAMBHARA 

Sukta  79 

1.  I  have  seen  the  greatness  of  this  great  one,  the 
Immortal  in  the  mortal  peoples.  The  jaws  of  this  abund¬ 
ant  eater,  separate  and  held  apart,  are  brought  close 
together,  devouring,  insatiable. 

2.  His  head  is  in  the  secrecy,  his  eyes  wide  apart, 
insatiable  he  eats  up  the  forest  with  his  tongue  of  flame. 
They  bring  together  his  foods  for  him  with  the  pacings 
of  their  feet,  their  hands  of  obeisance  are  outstretched 
in  the  peoples. 


569 


0£S 


niii  kfeji£  tejlny 
I  itL2a*jyi±!fe 


bife  fej  (HM>  y±m 
ibblb  Hyb  :kijie 


op  *£& 


H6MI  feblbb  :blb£  :fej£b  my 

i  myhLbjmm.  ytbjysm  lm  tm?  (blmj 


u^n  :iym±uii  pa;p<;i?bh  bj  i^pu»j$  W>^  tsyam 
i  nyfejnm  k  lyifiiL  biste^Mtii  tm  mi  0$ 


iiVti i  irn  bjxxibis  iHfeiij  mt&t  byymm^b  mb 

I  UjhxaK  Dj^PKKx'lh^lH»t>lbaP  &]£  H*»tt  |J2 


11*11  :ib%is  b  :ibfebj  -g->u»j<;iP>fci».i?jh>tt  m  kb 

i  .bjis  ytdi  Diih  muttmje  lyirn  is  may  phipp 


Hfell  :M  isbhb  rnj  p^b.«a.bbjHbfch  a.  bb 

I  rjblhb  :i?.yj2  k  \>n+$  bfiaijilb  ibis  :£ih  is 


HbIX  OIXSAK  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


3.  Desiring  the  secret  place  of  the  mother  farther  beyond 
he  crawls  like  a  child  over  the  wide  growths  of  earth. 
One  finds  him  shining  like  ripe  corn,  licking  away  the 
hurts,  within  in  her  lap. 

4.  O  heaven  and  earth,  I  declare  to  you  that  Truth  of 
you, — in  his  very  birth  the  child  of  your  womb  devours 
his  parents.  I  am  mortal  and  know  not  of  the  godhead; 
Fire  is  the  all-conscious  knower  and  he  is  the  thinker. 

5.  He  who  sets  swiftly  for  him  his  food  casts  on  him  the 
outpourings  of  light  by  which  he  is  nourished,  for  him  he 
sees  with  a  thousand  eyes:  O  Fire,  thou  frontest  us  on 
every  side. 

6.  What  omission  or  sin  hast  thou  done  before  the  gods, 
I  ask  thee,  O  Fire,  for  I  know  not.  In  his  play  unplaying 
a  tawny  lion,  eating  only  to  devour,  he  has  cut  all 
asunder  limb  by  limb,  as  a  knife  cuts  the  cow. 

7.  He  who  is  born  in  the  forests  has  yoked  his  horses 
tending  all  ways  but  caught  back  by  straight-held  reins. 
Mitra,  well-born,  has  distributed  to  him  the  treasures 
and  he  has  grown  to  completeness  increasing  in  every 
member. 


Sukta  80 

1 .  Fire  gives  to  us  the  Horse  that  carries  the  plenitude, 
Fire  gives  the  Hero  who  has  the  inspired  hearing  and 
stands  firm  in  the  work;  Fire  ranges  through  earth  and 
heaven  revealing  all  things,  Fire  gives  the  Woman,  the 
tenant  of  the  city,1  from  whose  womb  is  born  the  hero. 


1  or,  the  many-thoughted. 


571 


Il£ll  lie  PftPJhM^I^Pfrltoh  ^feb^umie 

IIPIU'  iy  Itlib  |hPh  i±±4±t  uaiiklh  ^22|  !££}  iii^le 


llV)U  klbjlt  HJ1X  ijh  isli*  :k^£»PdH.b  £&iJH±le  itoX  Xyie 

l  :mmyus  tyhlh  *Xb  fays^.h&  iy  ifthfehfehkyie 


11x11  Ikt>?:  ikuy  pjihib.p^ipipp  Ikho^  tejfejktjie 
I  iyy±n  :h  hjV-Pij*  lli^yte  jnfrJF  Vp>P»jte 


M  £  It  HH  JBemitl£K 


kb  tyxxyie 


^h.^>PjcnBlk^<fc  :p-»Uv 


[\h.U  Jxijali  Pl2i  InJIkPPj^HP  k^fe  A^fatjle 

i  lie  yx&ji  ^ihiiasmt:  kxiyn  raKmte 


3313  DIXSA1M  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


2.  May  there  be  a  happy  fuel  for  Fire  at  his  labour, 
Fire  enters  into  the  great  earth  and  heaven:  Fire  urges 
on  one  who  is  all  alone  in  his  battles,  Fire  cleaves  asunder 
the  multitude  of  the  enemy. 

3.  Fire  has  protected  the  ear1  of  the  worshipper2,  Fire 
burnt  out  the  Waster3  from  the  waters;  Fire  delivered 
Atri  within  the  blaze4,  Fire  united  man’s5  sacrifice  with 
its  progeny. 

4.  May  Fire  in  the  hero’s  shape  give  us  the  Treasure, 
may  Fire  give  us  the  sage  who  wins  the  thousands;  Fire 
has  extended  the  offering  in  heaven,  his  are  the  planes 
upheld  separately  in  many  spaces. 


5.  Fire  the  sages  with  their  utterances  call  to  every 
side,  to  Fire  men  call  who  are  opposed  in  their  march, 
to  Fire  the  Birds  flying  in  mid-air;  Fire  encircles  the 
thousands  of  the  Ray-Cows. 

6.  Fire  the  peoples  pray  who  are  human,  Fire  men  of 
different  birth  who  dwell  as  neighbours,  Fire  brings  the 
Gandharvi  to  the  path  of  the  Truth,  the  Fire’s  path  of 
the  ray-cows  is  settled  in  the  Light. 


1  “ Tyam ”,  “that  other”  ear,  the  inner  ear  which  listens  to  inspired 
knowledge. 

2  Sayana  takes  the  two  words  4  jaralah ”  “ karna ”  as  if  they  were  one 
indicating  the  name  of  the  Rishi  “Jaratkarna”, 

3  Sayana  renders  “jarutha”  “a  demon”. 

4  Sayana  renders  “in  the  hot  cauldron”  “in  the  earth”* 

5  Sayana  renders  “gave  progeny  to  the  Rishi  Nrimedha”. 


a39 


573 


Ilxll  klhtoSJtt  yife  JfeyilS  kklhfelfa  ^  tofejkjm 
I  :kllkJ±tJkJiSle  i^it  Ifeite  ktte  ^HhthhH 


Ufell  MMhSih  H  tkiii^feu  £jlb  yh 

I  fe  ih  st^ntR]  :ja^  12aS  hkfejlfchy*£ 


IlNll  pmfc^h  hJhcPfeb  |frl>r>-k  felk.V  Hlt?^>.H  Ul.Wfe|  lie 
I  :frkjk  J£hi  JbLlfclte&LH  Ihfejte  liaHbi? 


lUH  kPfek  §lh  :&y  H  Ik  tt  :£hJH  :Jctj§&  ik^K  UdiiliJ 


I  mi  i±JJJ2  hkPibjK  )£hj  kjmy  IhkKJIfe 


6\?  Ml 


ne\u  ikinbjg  msi2ate]t  >,ik.kjt£  fei±s  ime 

i  kPfcjpfi  ikik^bki^H  mp.fciikimi3fe  rkis  mme 


3 -an  OIXSAH  3HX  OX  SMNAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


7.  The  divine  craftsmen  have  fashioned  the  Wisdom- 
Word  for  the  Fire,  the  Fire  we  have  declared  as  a  vast 
purification.  O  ever-youthful  Fire,  protect  thy  worshipper; 
O  Fire,  win  for  him  by  sacrifice  the  great  Treasure. 


PAYU  BHARADWAJA 
Sukta  87 

1.  I  set  ablaze  Fire  of  the  plenitude,  the  slayer  of  the 
Rakshasas,  I  approach  him  as  a  friend  and  the  widest 
house  of  refuge;1  the  Fire  has  been  kindled  and  grows 
intense  by  the  workings  of  the  will,  may  he  protect  us 
from  the  doer  of  hurt,  by  the  day  and  by  the  night. 

2.  O  knower  of  all  things  bom,  high-kindled,  iron- 
tusked,  touch  with  thy  ray  the  demon-sorcerers;  do 
violence  to  him  with  thy  tongue  of  flame,  the  gods  who 
kill,2  the  eaters  of  flesh,  putting  them  off  from  us  shut 
them  into  thy  mouth. 

3.  Destruction,  whetting  set  upon  them  both  thy  tusks, 
the  higher  and  the  lower,  O  thou  who  art  of  both  worlds,3 
thou  circle  in  the  mid-air,  O  king,  and  snap  up  in  thy 
jaws  the  demon-sorcerers. 

4.  Turning  on  them  by  our  sacrifices  thy  arrows,  O 
Fire,  by  our  speech  thy  javelins,  plastering  them  with 
thy  thunderbolts  pierce  with  these  in  their  hearts  the 
demon-sorcerers  who  confront  us,  break  their  arms. 


1  or.  a  widest  peace; 

2  or,  the  gods  of  ignorance, 

3  or,  O  thou  who  hast  both, 


575 


\\H  \\  q  Ihfcjhk 

I  ^  upu*  kite  pk>h  £  kJJiJJs 

Uo^ii  i^k  ^^no.£ib  eh.  UBfe  i^lafe  Uii|t?ah  tJOMH 
I  iKrS^iftft  PjK  iajyt  k±H  fekj  Ji£i>  ijii 


11^,11  ^fa-P  iPJhfclb  kfctk  Ifei  Ut  klfeJSJte  HJMltei. 

\  :p^k  h)r>  is  :kt6.k  k^Ufci  £h  ±&i  lb&k  Hlhki&^k 


M?M  kUbk^>  2akp2  ifckjk  kiki  1 kk 

|  PJ^nS  J2  ^iifeSlJl  ^  fell®  \)i  ;it^i2  ^  ^ 


||$\U  ^u^*>hP»l»gb6j  :MHIfe  JilfelbyS  ^JJ£  ^  bite 

I  t>iuifaSihhjptjS>iPlfrt*lfe  h»£iUi£ 


H^H  tunftny  ifeic  bafej  ip^i-»p  ,p-»£h  :ttjitjh  p?i.j^±iSi2 
\  kbpp  1*>  ^  p>HP^iP4j^bPI^  HJi&h  Jklkfeii 


UV)U  Pinbb  ft|PP]  fcjToafeftS:  mitasfe  iijUnls  :*%Jim  lfiJikb  S 
I  j2ib;j?.§iJt2  kite 


3HH  OIASAW  3H1  OX  SMWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


5.  O  Fire,  tear  the  skin  of  the  demon-sorcerer;  let  the 
cruel  thunderbolt  slay  him  in  its  wrath;  rend  his  limbs, 
O  knower  of  all  things  born;  hungry  for  its  flesh  let  the 
carrion-eater  pick  asunder  his  mangled  body. 

6.  Wherever  now  thou  seest  him,  O  knower  of  all 
things  born,  whether  standing  or  walking,  or  flying  on 
the  paths  in  the  mid-air,  a  shooter  sharpening  his 
weapon,  pierce  him  with  thy  arrow. 

7.  Rescue  from  the  assault  of  the  demon-sorcerer  with 
his  spears  the  man  touched  by  his  grasp,  O  knower  of  all 
things  bom,  O  Fire,  blazing  supreme  slay  these  devourers 
of  the  flesh;  let  the  brilliant  birds  of  prey  eat  him  up. 

8.  Here  proclaim  which  is  he,  O  Fire,  what  demon¬ 
sorcerer,  who  is  the  doer  of  this  deed?  To  him  do  violence 
with  thy  blaze,  O  youthful  god,  subject  him  to  eye  of 
thy  divine  vision. 

9.  O  Fire,  guard  with  thy  keen  eye  the  sacrifice,  lead 
it  moving  forward  to  the  Shining  Ones,  O  conscious 
thinker;  O  thou  of  the  divine  vision,  when  thou  blazest 
fierce  against  the  Rakshasas  let  not  the  demon-sorcerers 
overcome  thee. 

10.  Divine  of  vision,  see  everywhere  the  Rakshasa  in 
the  peoples,  cleave  the  three  peaks  of  him;  his  flanks,  O 
Fire,  cleave  with  thy  wrath,  rend  asunder  the  triple  root 
of  the  demon-sorcerer. 

11.  Triply  may  the  demon-sorcerer  undergo  thy  onrush, 
he  who  slays  the  Truth  by  falsehood;  him  overspreading 
with  thy  ray,  O  knower  of  all  things  born,  fell  down  in 
front  of  him  who  hymns  thee. 


577 


Il^iu  ‘UitaSlh  liitit  Si^2l£  feili 

laafe'Bsh  mm  faunas  Saak  fcm> 


llXiU  ;un»&^fc  itJK  Jh£&llb  ^JaS«in|i±t  IhPjl.EE 

i  wi>h  kHiiiin  mhH  Ijyali  m> 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


MAN DA LA  TEN 


12.  Set  in  thy  singer,  O  Fire,  the  eye  with  which  thou 
secst  the  trampler  with  his  hooves,  the  demon-sorcerer  5 
even  as  did  Atharvan,  burn  with  the  divine  Light  this 
being  without  knowledge  who  does  hurt  to  the  Truth. 

13.  The  cursing  with  which  today  couples  revile  each 
other,  the  curses  which  are  born  in  the  imprecations  of  the 
singers,  the  arrow  which  is  born  from  the  mind  of  wrath, 
with  that  pierce  through  the  heart  the  demon-sorcerers. 

14.  Away  from  us  cleave  by  thy  burning  energy 
the  demon-sorcerers,  away  from  us  cleave  by  the  heat  of 
thy  wrath  the  Rakshasa,  O  Fire,  away  from  us  cleave  by' 
thy  ray  these  slayer  gods1,  blazing  away  from  us  cleave 
these  who  glut  themselves  with  men’s  lives. 

15.  May  the  gods  cleave  away  today  the  crooked  one, 
may  harsh  curses  come  to  confront  him,  may  the  shafts 
enter  into  the  vital  part  of  one  who  thieves  by  speech,  may 
he  undergo  the  onset  of  each  and  every  one,  the  demon¬ 
sorcerer. 

16.  The  demon-sorcerer  who  feeds  on  the  flesh  of  human 
beings,  who  feeds  on  horses  and  on  cattle,  the  one  who 
carries  away  the  milk  of  the  Cow  unslayable,  cut  asunder 
their  necks  with  the  flame  of  thy  anger,  O  Fire. 

17.  O  thou  who  hast  the  divine  vision,  let  not  the 
demon-sorcerer  partake  of  the  yearly  milk  of  the  shining 
cow;  O  Fire,  whichever  of  them  would  glut  himself  on  the 
nectar  him  pierce  in  front  in  his  vital  part  with  thy  ray  of 
light. 


1  or,  the  gods  01'  ignorance 


579 


f:  +Tc£^t  qfc  'Ttfl  TT3W  I 


llo^u  liisiais  iaahj^ftl>lt'te  £  ^  Hps 

lkmi£  ltel  fei  kBbSliibiE  fc*K  ^  & 


HYMNS  TO  THE  MYSTIC  FIRE 


MANDALA  TEN 


18.  May  the  demon-sorcerers  drink  poison  from  the 
Ray-Cows,  may  they  be  cloven  asunder  who  are  of  evil 
impulse  before  the  infinite  mother,  may  the  divine  sun 
betray  them  to  thee,  may  they  be  deprived  of  their  share 
of  the  growths  of  earth. 

19.  Ever  dost  thou  crush  the  demon-sorcerer,  O  Fire, 
never  have  the  Rakshasas  conquered  thee  in  the  battles; 
burn  one  by  one  from  their  roots  the  eaters  of  raw  flesh, 
may  they  find  no  release  from  thy  divine  missile. 

20.  O  Fire,  do  thou  guard  us  from  above  and  from 
below,  thou  from  behind  and  from  the  front;  may  those 
most  burning  ageless  flames  of  thine  blazing  burn  one 
who  is  a  voice  of  evil. 

21.  From  behind  and  from  in  front,  from  below  and 
from  above,  a  seer  by  thy  seer- wisdom  protect  us,  O  king; 
a  friend  protect  thy  friend,  ageless  protect  from  old  age, 
immortal  protect  us  who  are  mortals,  O  Fire. 

22.  O  forceful  Fire,  let  us  think  of  thee,  the  illumined 
sage  as  a  fortress  around  us,  one  violent  of  aspect,  slayer 
from  day  to  day  of  the  crooked  ones. 

23.  Consume  with  poison  the  crooked  Rakshasas;  O 
Fire,  burn  them  with  thy  keen  flame,  with  thy  fiery-pointed 
spears. 

24.  Burn  the  bewildered  demon-sorcerer  couples;  I 
thee  whet  to  sharpness,  inviolate,  with  my  thoughts,  O 
illumined  sage;  awake. 


581 


Ilxll  :Mt$i  tefciteH  :PhyibP^>PjiPh^  te»bjbj  ^  lie 
rte&lltteitetefci  £fcilteiS?bjteteijbiiJlte  tea  PtKtelte'-K 


life II  :tetea£  a  jtetejb  tejib  a  itelG  teS  jfe^tel  Pjhtfe  jpftb&b 
I  teteJteStel  ajitete=L>te  rtejife  feiil&S  Pjipfcac  jt&bR 


ll^ll  iiliteJiSteJ  ^teitej  ajteS  lie  IStej  teteih  pjip  |h^  p^pp. 

I  te^tetetete  teiaJlSJ  tetebte  Bte|Itte]tepaisaiite  & 


IliH^te^ea  mte6  ltelittejtetej  ibn^b  (bbj5  IP($  h^btebj 
I  £hiZ±yiitel  Itebte  %te  ^teai  iniPMfrg-jbPiuv  £ 


av>  ^ 

:te&£h  IMJte 


llV)iii  ktejte  M  tej  an  yitei  h^PihSih 
I  lyjs  :tetei?tej  ip>£  p^k 


MIJ  0I.I.SA1V  HH1  OJL  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 

25.  O  Fire,  cleave  asunder  their  wrath  with  thy  flame 
of  wrath  to  every  side;  break  utterly  the  strength,  the 
energy  of  the  Rakshasa,  of  the  demon-sorcerer. 


ARUNA  VAITAH AVY A 
SUKTA  91 

1.  Adored  by  those  who  are  wakeful,  the  dweller  in  the 
house  is  kindled  in  the  house  aspiring  in  the  seat  of  revela¬ 
tion,  the  sacrificant  of  every  offering,  one  Supreme,1 
wide  of  being,  wide  in  light,  a  perfect  friend  to  the  man 
who  seeks  his  friendship. 

2.  In  his  visioned  glory  he  lodges  as  the  guest  in  every 
house,  as  a  bird  in  forest  and  forest;  he  disdains  not  the 
peoples,  universal  he  dwells  in  being  and  being,  common 
to  all  he  dwells  in  man  and  man. 

3.  Thou  art  discerning  in  thy  judgments,  strong  of  will 
in  thy  workings  of  will,  O  Fire,  an  omniscient  seer  in  thy 
seer- wisdoms ;  a  possessor  of  riches  thou  rulcst  sole  over 
all  the  riches  nourished  by  earth  and  by  heaven. 

4.  Thou  hast  known  and  reached  thy  luminous  native 
seat  where  is  the  order  of  the  Truth  in  the  plane  of  revela¬ 
tion;  free  from  stain  of  evil  have  come  thy  perceptions  of 
knowledge  like  the  white  brilliances  of  the  dawns,2  like 
rays  of  the  sun. 


1  or,  one  desirable, 

2  or,  like  the  advents  of  the  dawns, 


583 


:&£jkkx4  jkkh  kkkakjS  k  %Uals  Pjfc>i>  jp.»hb^b 
I  :Jib^  Hfc£feJ  P>h>IP{5  IbbltP  pifb  bbhjlba 


ll?ll  iHlii  ^iDk  ^jtkhjk  PhjMHP  Ibabj^  PbPju 
I  ktjh  ilkKXJh  >.IH^P  ktjhPMPK  h->bbbj  ^Hfelbj* 


H6\ll  :kl&h  InjJ.>.k-ts  kii2i^teJ5  tfekjb  jjfejb  (b*>  ^»Pb  ^  jjjg 

I  J&2akJ.lJ.fateJ^  uskk  fck  kie  U£k  |PhjS  Pbh|Pib 


tl^ll  llkiy  £  £k£  ££|Xkk±sjkXjk  P-tPPjb  PikP  Pkjp 
l  :iklh  kikkp  kips  jhikP  hfcpjppu 


•I'll'  fajllbKIS  kfa£J  Jlfei  ijh  fe  PJIPb  |?^Pkj~>|bb|bb 
I  :J&li%  t  pb£  fcibjb.i;jlkb.tjpkbj  bjr>b<ab  |bkj  bp 


3HH  OIXSAW  3HA  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


5.  Thy  glories  like  lightnings  from  a  storm  cloud  break 
into  light  of  knowledge  brilliant  like  the  rays  of  intuition 
of  the  dawns;  when  loosed  on  the  growths  of  earths  and 
woods  of  pleasaunce  thou  seekest1  out  thyself  the  food  for 
thy  mouth. 

6.  Him  the  growths  of  earth  held  as  a  child  in  the  womb 
in  whom  was  the  order  of  the  Truth,  the  Waters  become 
the  mothers  of  that  Fire  who  gave  him  birth;  he  is  the  com¬ 
mon  child  with  whom  the  pleasaunce-woods  and  the  plants 
of  earth  are  pregnant  and  they  are  delivered  of  him  always. 

7.  Missioned,  fanned  by  the  wind  when  swiftly  entering 
into  thy  food  thou  spreadest  wide  after  thy  desire,  thy 
ageless  hosts,  as  thou  becomest,  toil  like  chariot-warriors 
far  apart. 

8.  Fire  the  creator  of  wisdom,  the  accomplisher  of  the 
discovery  of  knowledge,  Fire  the  priest  of  the  call,  the  all- 
embracing  thinker,  him  they  choose  universal  in  the 
little  offering,  him  in  the  great, — not  another,  O  Fire, 
than  thou. 

9.  The  ordainers  of  the  work,  they  who  desire  thee, 
choose  thee  as  priest  of  the  call  in  their  discoveries  of 
knowledge  when  the  seekers  of  the  godhead  hold  thy  de¬ 
light,2  human  beings  who  have  plucked  for  thee  the  sacred 
grass  of  thy  seat  and  have  brought  their  offerings. 


1  or,  heapest  food  in  thy  mouth. 

2  or,  set  before  thee  the  things  of  thy  delight, 


585 


98S 


uv.jn  lii'ib  biitnji  tjmsib 

I  h-l.b^'fe  bk  b'bk  ^  Mlibjk 


llxill  bbiJfcPilfe  bb&  bjb  UlI  bbb  bl£abl4H 
I  :m!ue  Hi2aLtete  IWj  iiife  mbJa3fc  i±lMbJ±Hb 


life  ill  :imb£  \pi»p-  mb  PhIP  jth->PJ  h-xa^  l>P»tg  IhP 
I  :b  SyrJi  ih->bb^|b  iph(bp  j^laS  bimts  ii±& 


iikin  kbifeua  §m  mi-b  ^ph*  ^  ^hfeb 

I  bhibtt  :bbXa£  :ibj  Jb3b  lbiiiK  lblb  (ppp  bib  li±I 


ni  ill  ajbi>mmi£i2  j&  hWS  njit  pjpp  ip\S  ^ 

I  a)$afej£  lb  p?i»i»  ibbjii  :mtt  mppip  P>kh+fcn? 


l»°ill^  ^  HJlb  U^b  bjbl>bat±m  fc->ntK  ba 

2at  bb  bmjltbjh  bb  bjl  bHbP 


a'au  OLLSAPJ  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


10.  O  Fire,  thine  are  the  call  and  the  offering,  thine  the 
purification  and  the  order  of  the  sacrifice,  thine  the 
lustration;  thou  art  the  fire-bringer  for  the  seeker  of  the 
Truth.  The  annunciation  is  thine,  thou  becomest  the  pil¬ 
grim-rite:1  thou  art  the  priest  of  the  Word  and  the  master 
of  the  house  in  our  home. 

11* *  *  *  * 

12.  For  him  these  thoughts  and  utterances  go  forth 
from  us,  these  words  high  and  hymns  of  illumination 
and  these  high  lauds  and  meet  together  seeking  the  riches 
for  the  master  of  riches,  for  the  knower  of  all  things  bom, 
and  his  desire  is  towards  them. 

13.  I  would  speak  to  the  ancient  One  a  laud  new  to  his 
desire,  may  he  hear  us;  may  it  avail  to  touch  his  heart 
deep  within  like  a  wife  beautifully  robed  for  her  lord’s 
desire. 

14.  Fire  to  whom  are  loosed  and  offered  our  horses,  our 
bulls  and  oxen  and  heifers  and  our  rams,  to  Fire  the  nectar- 
drinker  who  bears  on  his  beak  the  Soma  wine,  to  the 
ordainer  of  things,  I  beget  a  thinking  full  of  beauty  from 
my  heart. 

15.  An  oblation  has  been  offered  into  thy  mouth,  O 
Fire,  as  if  clarified  butter  in  a  ladle,  as  if  Soma  wine  in  a 
bowl.  Found  in  us  the  treasure  in  which  are  the  heroes  and 
which  wins  for  us  the  plenitudes, — the  treasure  excellent2 
and^ glorious  and  vast. 

1  or,  thou  art  the  priest  of  the  pilgrim-rite: 

*  not  translated. 

*  or,  high-proclaimed 


587 


II ^ II  klkk  jthjads  J2iy  fcjie  fcakj 

I  Iblii  kj  ikkk  Ikfrklklhft  %lb£  Hkk  ^hboS  lie 

llVill  .UftblisS  kkit  ULttk 

I  :ikihit±J4  :fckk  k  lktkjb  lkiM*  kj  mkjttjkkitks 


IIXU  hkjki  tekkjle  Jk£k  XkkJ  ^teJs  k 

i  kMie  me  (jk*k  imxjkik  lmisjb  usijis  :£jk  i^e-ik 

ufcii  kmysfc  jkiajysb  kn4i  h  Mk  b|biMt?j>  m 

I  :U4Mi  :kj£k  kkilkssiksmfe  EiSIiMK> 


llhil  :k  k  ikk%  kktkkli  kkkjjk  EJib*b 

i  u?ma.-ifje<-itk  i&h  kiHh  i»pik  m>  Weep 


llili:ik%K  HJXkJk2  :kH  m  ki^tfejfctjSkfckj  Bk  Ja  lie 

I  kjlbfc  kik^  <k|  kjil  \faEb  me  jfrbjb 


®U  fiifi 

:jsMJttmii±]£ 

0  0  '* 


3313  OIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


JAMADAGNI  BHARGAVA 

SUKTA  110 

1 .  High-kindled  today  in  the  house  of  the  human  being, 
thou  doest  sacrifice  a  god  to  the  gods,  O  knower  of  all 
things  born;  bring  them  to  us  as  one  who  has  knowledge, 
O  friendly  Light;  for  thou  art  the  messenger,  the  seer, 
the  thinker. 

2.  O  son  of  the  body,  revealing  the  paths  of  our  jour- 
neyings  to  the  Truth  make  them  sweet  with  the  Wine  of 
Delight,  O  thou  with  thy  high  tongue  of  flame ;  enriching 
with  our  thoughts  the  mantras  and  the  sacrifice  set  our 
pilgrim-sacrifice  in  the  gods. 

3.  One  prayed  and  adored,  O  Fire,  calling  them  to  us 
arrive,  companioned  by  the  Shining  Ones,  O  mighty 
One,  thou  art  the  summoner  of  the  gods,  so,  missioned, 
strong  to  sacrifice,  do  them  sacrifice. 

4.  An  ancient  seat  of  sacred  grass  is  plucked  this  morn, 
in  the  direction  of  this  earth,  in  front  of  the  days,  wide 
it  spreads  beyond  a  supernal  seat  of  happy  ease  for  the 
gods  and  the  mother  infinite. 

5.  Widely  expanding  may  they  spring  apart  making 
themselves  beautiful  for  us  as  wives  for  their  lords;  O 
divine  doors,  vast  and  all-pervading,  be  easy  of  approach 
to  the  gods. 

6.  Let  night  and  day  come  gliding  to  us  and  queens 
of  sacrifice,  sit  close  together  in  their  place  of  session,  the 
two  divine  women,  great  and  golden,  holding  a  supreme 
glory  of  brilliant  form, — 


a40 


589 


069 


llUtt  :ifc£  £•»?>>  Ejl  .fe^ua  ^Phfe&jK  :£]1 

l  :ib]l£  PtakkiPibPPjhPh  byibjbs  (Pirn  (bp 


Mo ^ h  bBb  lbbb  lial  B-»»fcP  :bijb  lb£  iPPJlfc  :PJh->PP 
I  hJJ[fc>$  Ik&tfc  hlh  jPIfr^  W-cPP  Ih^k^  U'Pblhfr 


ll^ll  PI9PJ  ttjb  $Pj>l?qtP  fe£  Hh|p.h  (PhjVjP^  15PP 

I  lb£bj  bjlkfeit  kahjlhat  JfebJb  Ibtejhlfeue  b 


U?l<  Siib  :bhbi  Jbbiib  bjbi  b^Jblfeb  JbbJ 
I  |p^pp  kjybabh  lEJbjJibb  ]bhik  bb  Jb  lie 


II6\||  ibiiiij  IbbjK  :bj*b£  bjblb  bib  bbbfej  Jibbbl&b 
t  bibb  bibb  bb  lbibbj  lfelfeS  ihfcb  mbil  lbafe 


SHIJ  OIXSAW  3HX  Oi  SNHAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


7.  The  two  divine  priests  of  the  call,  also,  the  first  and 
perfect  in  speech  building  the  sacrifice  of  man  that  he 
may  do  worship,  doers  of  the  work  impelling  to  the  dis¬ 
coveries  of  knowledge,  pointing  by  their  direction  to  the 
ancient  Light. 


8.  May  Bharati  come  swiftly  to  our  sacrifice,  Ila 
awakening  to  knowledge  here  like  a  human  thinker,  and 
Saraswati,  the  three  goddesses, — may  they  sit,  perfect 
in  their  works,  on  this  sacred  seat  of  happy  ease. 


9.  He  who  fashioned  in  their  forms  this  earth  and 
heaven,  the  Parents,  and  fashioned  all  the  worlds,  him 
today  and  here,  O  missioned  priest  of  the  call,  do  thou 
worship,  strong  for  sacrifice,  having  the  knowledge,  even 
the  divine  maker  of  forms. 


10.  Revealing  by  thy  self-power  the  goal  of  the  gods, 
release  towards  it  in  the  order  of  the  Truth  our  offerings. 
Let  the  tree  and  the  divine  accomplisher  of  the  work  and 
the  Fire  take  the  taste  of  the  offering  with  the  sweetness 
and  the  light. 


1 1.  As  soon  as  he  was  born  Fire  measured  out  the  shape 
of  the  sacrifice  and  became  the  leader  who  goes  in  front 
of  the  gods.  In  the  speech  of  this  priest  of  the  call  which 
points  out  by  its  direction  the  Truth,  may  the  gods  par¬ 
take  of  the  oblation  made  Swaha. 


591 


265 


:b  JfeMbJi  gibbbdjb^bfe  :bi}ie  ^Mt  §lh  :kt^. 

I  :ta'»P  h4VP-.ih-»h  yib'tPbr.'fe  :^Pbn<b  :P>jbS  1£ 


11*11  b2s£  bdblij  a  bdl£b  bfej  bi^H  i±  Jtobbb  iMbui  m 

I  :ipr?ah^i»  i}h  :iblb  hJteJb  bblbiblfrhrs  b  bib  b{ 


llfell  :bb.iMbblb  b  bbljit  >bbjib  k  Mjb  Mile 

I  hblfiMbhbb  bdteJJS  Idi  bJsdhJE^  bbb  b  bj  |b  b 


Hfcll  lbb  Bbb  yditti^is  k  Jidl  ibitbi  llik  liMibJl? 
I  iHi  \UMH  abb  lbb  Jit  H  :hP-ihftb  bjlb  Mb  ibjj.S 


II  l\\  bib:  k£  Ijb  iab  ISbfe  b  b  ibbbbjb  bjb  LbbK 
I  ^Plb  PJhiM>Plh  Jb  b  JfeiSb  b4ln->P->lli;<3ajS  Jcfej 


Tau  OIXSAIM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


UPASTUTA  VARSHTIHAVYA 
SuKTA  115 

1.  Marvellous  is  the  power  to  upbear  of  this  young, 
this  infant  god,  for  he  goes  not  to  his  two  mothers  to  drink 
their  milk,  even  though  one  without  teats  of  plenty  brought 
him  to  birth  then  as  now,  from  the  first  he  did  his  carrying, 
performing  his  mighty  embassy. 

2.  Fire,  verily,  is  established,  a  giver  and  mighty  doer 
of  works,  he  clings  to  the  trees  with  his  blazing  tusks 
achieving  the  pilgrim-sacrifice  with  his  besieging  tongue 
ol  flame,  he  is  like  a  snorting  bull,  master  in  his  pasturage. 


3.  He  is  to  you  like  a  bird  settled  on  a  tree,  like  the 
divine  moon-flow  of  the  Soma  plant,  like  a  clamorous 
spreading  ocean;  he  is  as  one  who  carries  in  his  mouth 
of  flame,  exuberant  in  strength,  mighty  in  the  way  of 
his  works,  rushing  on  his  paths. 

4.  O  ageless  Fire,  when  thou  rangest  the  spaces  in  thy 
will  to  burn,  there  are  all  around  thee  as  if  unsinking  winds 
like  joyful  fighters  having  the  command  for  the  seeking 
they  march  towards  the  warrior  of  the  triple  world1. 

5.  This  is  the  Fire,  friend  of  the  seer,  himself  the  greatest 
of  seers,  who  delivers  from  the  inner  foe;  may  Fire  guard 
the  speakers  of  the  word,  Fire  the  illumined  seers,  may 
he  give  his  protection  to  them  and  to  us. 


1  or,  Trita  ihc  warrior. 


593 


tlfcukby&  :PJhMi  lk^kiJSJkiilfefeSliJ  yakls  Pkll  k 

I  hbf.h3jkh>]PjhMfc  J±Lfe  &ynit  fc  kfe 


tsmiis  t^i+fcfrj 


-MS  kk  Jkk  b^kte  ^mWjttbglab  KX&  P*?Ptntt  ijlh  fe£M 

i  kfejbsjttfaaa  mpfohp-  MMksajfe  fciiM  ly.S 


II7II  riblJai  >_kis  :Blie  xmis  LMfeS  lkM  kli^M  1M 
I  <kL£  IMS  \^±h  h4P^>h|M  £jip^  Plhfa  U£-£ 


IICMI  fclkkik  M}k  Hjxkaa  k  IMJ2  iht?lPV-  lkfejfi  to  k  IkltokJ 
I  :JttjL  t>pfe  :klk  £22  :kMtJijk  Ik  rkhPtjlfch 


ll^ll  £>*>Pppl~h  hlriP^JK  £k  l±k  Iktoto  kSkj  |kfc 

I  ^Pifr  Me  |  PI  PM  hk  to&hjS  £llk  tolhkiiyik 


3HL'I  OIXSAPi  3HX  OX  SNJ\AH 


MANDALA  TEN 


6.  O  high-born,  thou  art  he  who  moves  swiftly  in  the 
wake  of  the  knower  of  all  things  born,  the  Fire  forceful 
and  most  full  of  the  plenitude  and  even  in  the  waterless 
desert  for  him  who  is  there  and  desires  it  and  is  full  of 
greatness,  winnest  by  the  violence  of  thy  bow  that  which 
is  supreme. 

7.  This  is  the  Fire  who  is  lauded  accompanied  by 
mortal  illumined  seers,  the  Shining  One,1  strong  and 
glad  by  men,  they  who  are  seekers  of  the  Truth,  and  like 
well-established  friends,  like  the  heavens  with  their  lights 
have  power  on  human  beings. 

8.  “O  son  of  energy,  O  forceful  One,”  so  adores  thee 
the  mighty  speech  of  Upastuta,  thee  let  us  laud,  by  thee 
may  we  be  armed  with  the  heroes,  holding  more  and 
more  an  ever  longer  life. 

9.  Thus  have  extolled  thee,  O  Fire,  the  sons  of  Vrish- 
tihavya,  the  Upastuta  Rishis;2  protect  them  and  the 
illuminates  who  speak  the  word,  rising  on  high  they  have 
attained  with  the  cry  of  Vashat ,  Vashat ,  with  the  cry 
of  obeisance. 

CHITRAMAHA  VASISHTHA 
Sukta  122 

1.  I  voice  the  Shining  One  with  its  richly  varied  lights3, 
the  fair  and  happy,  the  great  in  whom  is  nothing  hostile; 
Fire,  the  priest  of  the  call,  the  master  of  the  house  gives 
the  healing  forces  that  sustain  the  world,  he  gives  us 
the  hero-energy. 


1  or,  the  master  of  riches, 

2  or,  sages,  extolled; 

3  or,  greatnesses, 


595 


Hill  ttiie 

l jlifeS  hiHh^ft  XisjUfc  Phih.PtPj  ihSfcpSS  til 


llVill  tj  1H  |It  jfaSkfe  fekteh  1H 

>  iiHikte  Iklitbi  Jti  yjhJS  :x£  H 


llxll  ktafeS  Hah  ^  H!dL  MSitSlhHi  HJitXiHii 
I  HPPjlb  ^  ^jo|  HtaJ2j£  1%|>R  khJS  hk  i^U-fr 


llfell  XiX£  £  IbiljH  \hli&  MiX  lfeklHi  HlkXJX  In^feS 
I  fr^hlh  ^6  tiMrislS  hjlklh  M 


Mb.H  kfcite  XfehHfrle  IfejS  Hi  XXti£lX  kJ^kJkpik 
i  |P^f>  pjiphp  Pigfej  tjixifej  yaJ2  ^  xl  ±yis  hje  |jni*>1* 


3HU  01XSAW  3HX  OX  SfTOH 


MANDALA  TEN 


2.  O  Fire,  take  pleasure  in  my  word,  let  thy  joy  res¬ 
pond  to  it,  for  thou  knowest  all  discoveries  of  knowledge, 
O  strong  will!  Robed  in  light,  put  out  a  path  for  the 
Word,  the  gods  have  begotten  all  according  to  thy  law  of 
works. 

3.  Encompassing  the  seven  planes,  O  immortal,  giving 
to  the  giver,  to  the  doer  of  good  deeds,  grow  great;1  O 
Fire,  with  riches  full  of  hero-strength  crowding  on  him, 
accept  the  man  who  has  come  to  thee  with  the  fuel. 

4.  The  seven  givers  of  the  offering  pray  the  lord  of 
plenitudes,  the  supreme  Ray  of  intuition,  the  vicar  of  the 
sacrifice,  Fire,  the  Bull  with  the  luminous  back  who  hears 
our  words,  the  god  who  on  him  who  satisfies  him  with 
gifts  bestows  fullness  of  heroic  might. 

5.  Thou  art  the  first  and  supreme  messenger,  as  such 
when  thou  art  called  be  rapturous  for  immortality:  thee 
the  life-powers  make  resplendent  in  the  house  of  the  giver, 
thee  with  their  lauds  the  flame-seers  made  to  shine  out 
wide. 


6.  In  one  to  whom  sacrifice  is  dear,  for  the  giver  of 
sacrifice,  milking  the  force  that  is  a  good  milch-cow, 
the  force  that  founds  all,  O  strong  will,  O  Fire,  thrice 
pouring  light,  illumining  the  Truths,  circling  round  our 
house  and  our  sacrifice  thou  puttest  foith  thy  strength 
of  will. 


1  or,  exalt  him; 


597 


86S 


II fell  Xklkhlfe  h  :kl 

I  :k£jkjkjjh  kik±hkjkijjs£  :£%aii££!lhh  JkSE 


Hill  itk  JkkJi  iSJlnh  kJblhKVb-bj  i>Pik  |bf> 
I  lkblk  kjkkjk  jb-bPPk'  Ib-b^-fte  :lb.btbblh 


Hill  %ife  Mkli  HJ]J?.£  h^.bKU'lb  IPblt  (Pl'g-^b 
l  jkklkkj  (kkls  %h  Jkk  jkte  kk  kite 


°ai 

:*feMh  :iyie 


1(711  :k  Jkk  :kjk£}ki  klh  kk  klik  hHhtek  klhikii 
I  :kh%  kkkk)  kite  Ik: liilt  kkjlk  Jk^te  ifcikjk  ilk  kj 


IIGMI  ikste  ikikkkj  ktkkfJXkklk  kJk2ik£k  ikk  Uk 
l  :Jkklh  Jkkkte  lklkoil  k£  k2ajk»  Jkhk  IkikhJUk 


aau  oixsah  a  hi  ox  smmah 


MANDALA  TEN 


7.  Thee,  O  Fire,  making  their  messenger  men  have 
offered  sacrifice  in  the  outshining  of  this  dawn;  thee 
the  gods  have  increased  for  their  growing  to  greatness 
making  bright  the  oblation  of  light  in  the  pilgrim-sacrifice. 

8.  The  Vasishthas  called  thee  within  them;  full  of 
plenitude,  voicing  the  Fire,  ordainers  of  works  in  the 
discoverings  of  knowledge;  uphold  the  increasing  of  the 
riches  in  the  doers  of  the  sacrifice,  do  you  ever  guard  us 
with  all  kinds  of  weal. 


AGNI  PAVAKA 

SUKTA  140 

1.  O  Fire,  thy  inspiration  and  thy  growth  and  thy 
lights  blaze  in  their  greatness,  O  thou  who  shinest  out 
with  thy  lustres;  O  great  luminousness,  O  seer,  thou 
foundest  by  thy  strength  for  the  giver  a  plenitude  of 
utterance. 

2.  Purifying  is  thy  flaming  energy,  bright  is  thy 
energy,  indeficient  is  thy  energy  as  thou  ascendest  with 
thy  light — a  son  thou  rangest  and  protectest  the  Parents 
and  thou  joinest  together  earth  and  heaven. 

3.  O  son  of  energy,  O  knower  of  all  things  born,  well- 
founded  rejoice  in  our  perfect  utterances  and  our  think¬ 
ings;  in  thee  they  have  joined  together  impelling  forces 
of  many  forms,  richly  varied  in  their  prospering,  born 
to  charm  and  beauty. 


599 


009 


nfeii  kntansj  kusniy  :t  lie  1^  yae 

l  ifa.tej  l&L  ill2i>£jy  Iilie! 

Hill  |klte£  teldyait  |h)J?£  Htehjli  lE^ttjPh 
I  k}ltlh£  lnlhMe  Jfefe  fehjfeh  hi 

\\U\  lie  k  %lt  lie  fehj£fe|k  i^JUK 

I  kkktiel  HiKsitjH 

:SH11 h  m&h 

'O  V 


ll^ll  ikh  lDklh  IssJfe  lily  lie!  liiH&IH  laX!fe 
I  Okie  a£  >tyi  idk±E  Hfellijfe 


llVitl  ktyi  lyiieii  tihjlkt  lki+.S  fr>mfe  kyi 

I  :kt  yiteli  kiiLtS  hk%& 


iixii  k£&  lyum  isjiDh  jajMi  jy  y&e  Mias*  h 
I  tehl e  rnii  jtiinykis  ieifcixis 


a^ILi  OIXSAJM  3HX  Oi  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


4.  O  immortal  Fire,  ruling  over  creatures  born,  spread 
in  us  thy  Riches;  thou  art  master  of1  thy  body  of  vision 
and  thou  satest  thy  conquering  will. 

5.  A  thinker,  an  arranger  of  sacrifice,  a  master  of  great 
achievement  thou  foundest  a  bounty  of  delight  and  a 
great  and  fortunate  impulsion  and  conquering  Riches. 

6.  Men  have  set  in  front  this  great  Truth-possessing 
and  all-seeing  Fire  for  the  bliss;  thee  who  hast  the  ear 
that  hears  our  words  voice,  wide-extended,  one  divine 
throughout  the  human  generations. 


MRILIKA  VASISHTHA 

Sukta  150 

1.  Already  kindled  thou  art  kindled  again  for  the 
gods,  O  carrier  of  the  offering,  come  along  with  the  sons 
of  Aditi  and  with  the  Rudras  and  with  the  Shining 
Ones,  come  to  us  for  grace. 

2.  Accepting  this  sacrifice,  this  word  come  to  us,  we 
who  are  mortals  call  thee,  O  high-kindled  Fire,  we  call 
thee  for  grace. 

3.  Thee  I  voice  with  my  thought,  the  knower  of  all 
things  born,  in  whom  are  all  desirable  things,  O  Fire, 
bring  to  us  the  gods  whose  law  of  working  is  dear  to  us, 
dear  to  us  for  their  grace. 


1  or,  thou  shinest  out  from 


601 


209 


lull  :i»bb!bJ<Jl£!£h£  I  bJXJ  Ib^U  b&  IbXMtbKb  btK: 


U  £11  kifijh  lbbb  & i  bj£K:  l  bbbSJbibiUlt  feh  lix  bp.  Ihi  bills 


Mill  bbfth  bilj  lb  lb  I  Ibi^bb  ^>117^^  ^m>o»ik>  ib  mt 


mil  bbisbte  Hals  b£  l 


e^  cv 


:blsj  Jb  libilj  bi^le 


n'hii  :i%x£  y%i£  ^  mbp  byie 

I  .fenjfe  :bPIK  ■Xgajbjb  lM3>b  fcpbjk> 


IUII  bblbbfe  ifep2b  %I  pMpiftbh  ;jij±  Pfjn- 
I  ^te^bb  :bb3fc  ibabb  bijsipSj^K  ppphipip^  ^ptjn> 

grew  0USA1M  HH.L  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


4.  Fire,  the  god,  became  the  vicar  priest  of  the  gods, 
Fire  the  human  Rishis  have  kindled,  Fire  I  call  in  the 
conquest  of  the  riches  of  the  vast,  gracious  for  the  con¬ 
quest  of  the  riches. 

5.  Fire  protected  Atri  and  Bharadwaja  and  Gavisthira, 
protected  for  us  Kamva  and  Trasadasyu  in  the  battle, 
Fire  Vasishtha  the  vicar  priest  calls,  the  vicar  priest 
calls  him  for  grace. 


KETU  AGNEYA 
Sukta  156 

1.  May  our  thoughts  speed  the  Fire  on  his  way  like  a 
swift  galloper  in  the  battles,  by  him  may  we  conquer 
every  kind  of  wealth. 

2.  The  army  by  which  we  may  make  ours  the  Ray- 
Cows  under  thy  guard,  that  army  send  to  us1  for  the 
getting  of  plenty. 

3.  Bring  to  us,  O  Fire,  a  stable  wealth  of  the  Ray-Cows 
and  the  horses  of  power,  reveal  heaven,  turn  away  from 
us  the  evil  Trafficker. 

4.  O  Fire,  make  to  ascend  the  ageless  traveller-star, 
the  sun  in  heaven  upholding  the  Light  for  me. 


1  or,  speed  Tor  us 


603 


t09 


t  c 

llV>M  aj£Jah  :h  £  I  P*?ifr>Pfjfr  (ifcTt  :^us>  >ih  j^  ^ 


lUM  :k%  Jty^^Lh  :k  a  I  i^i&h  a  a  Ik&tt  kjjfcfrfcj 


nfell  :ia^  tyZ.hh  :k  B.  I  IfcLpjjlk  IngJk  l&h  PJfrfrP)  Jc^ii^i  \h 


llhll  :hQ  .tyiMi  :a  a 


:Uto>.h  :fc 


ll^ll  :i9L%^  i^^lah  :a  H  I  klfc^a&J  frlkhb  hVjfrfcUb  bUUK 

G\^ 

iMUlS  H>J= 


tiViii  iifei  uufe  mj£ 


I  fcajfe£b£  2ate  :2aJS 

V  \* 


kite 


mU  OIXSAPM  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


5.  O  Fire,  thou  art  the  ray  of  intuition  in  creatures, 
most  dear,  most  glorious,  seated  in  the  centre.1  Awake, 
founding  his  expansion  who  lauds  thee. 


VATSA  AGNEYA 
Sukta  187 

1.  Send  forth  the  word  to  the  Fire,  the  bull  of  the 
worlds,2  may  he  carry  us  through  beyond  the  hostile 
forces. 

2.  He  who  shines  beyond  the  desert  across  the  supreme 
Beyond,  may  he  carry  us  through  beyond  the  hostile 
forces. 

3.  He  who  destroys  the  Rakshasas,  the  bull  with  the 
brilliant  light,  may  he  carry  us  through  beyond  the 
hostile  forces. 

4.  He  who  looks  upon  all  the  worlds  and  sees  them 
wholly,  may  he  carry  us  through  beyond  the  hostile 
forces. 

5.  Fire  who  is  born  brilliant  on  the  further  shore  of 
this  world,  may  he  carry  us  through  beyond  the  hostile 
forces. 


1  or,  in  the  lap  of  the  mother. 

2  or,  of  the  peoples, 


605 


909 


11*11  P)rnfrft6  list  yiH  Jfe  fohhlhh 

I  ujiht>§  >^>h»  :Pj4»ifr  fe 


llfell  Hajy£  JJ»  H-UiB  :fe  bfeiit  HJitfeiit  JdJJttH 

l  WitaHUtaj  iii  :kh  :Jabt  tfeliiii 


Hill  ^t»lhP-  IHHftft  JeE  LbX  Idk  ife£ 
I  klkbUs  JijJJih  H  fe&fe  B  feafiik  i± 


win  ih  ltefefe  y±  B  IjlniyH  £h±£2£ 
l  lte  ki&hk 

\j  ♦ 


3>IIJ  QIXSAW  3HX  OX  SNWAH 


MANDALA  TEN 


SAMVANANA  ANGIRASA 

SUKTA  191 

O  Fire,  O  strong  one,  as  master  thou  unitest  us  with 
all  things  and  art  kindled  high  in  the  seat  of  revelation; 
do  thou  bring  to  us  the  Riches. 

2.  Join  together,  speak  one  word,  let  your  minds 
arrive  at  one  knowledge  even  as  the  ancient  gods  arriving 
at  one  knowledge  partake  each  of  his  own  portion. 

3.  Common  Mantra  have  all  these,  a  common  gather¬ 
ing  to  union,  one  mind  common  to  all,  they  are  together 
in  one  knowledge;  pronounce  for  you  a  common  Mantra, 
I  do  sacrifice  for  you  with  a  common  offering. 

4.  One  and  common  be  your  aspiration,  united  your 
hearts,  common  to  you  be  your  mind, — so  that  close 
companionship  may  be  yours. 


(/nfv&rsity  of  Southern  California  Ufemy 


607 


